In this report, we present some experienced improvements to YOLO series, forming a new high-performance detector. We switch the YOLO detector to an anchor-free manner and conduct other advanced detection techniques, i.e., label assignment strategy SimOTA to achieve state-of-the-art results across a large scale range of models
We hope this report can provide useful experience for developers and researchers in practical scenes. Rapid progress in machine learning has led to an exponential growth in the number of machine learning papers, with a new paper published every 15 minutes on average.
This speed of development presents a challenge for our field: how do we stay up-to-date and filter through a growing mountain of papers and repositories? A home for machine learning results makes it possible to stay connected with progress in the field without getting left behind.
This means everyone — researchers, engineers and hobbyists — can benefit from the latest knowledge, improving accessibility and ultimately accelerating progress itself. We took the first steps last year with our leaderboards feature. This was a community effort to collate all published results in ML in a single place with a machine-readable format and a free license.
We’re very grateful to the thousands of contributors who added results for their papers (and other papers) to create the world’s largest database of results in machine learning. One of the main requests of researchers for our leaderboards feature was more clarity about where results come from in the paper.
So today we are rolling out our new results interface that directly links results to their original tables in arXiv papers. To see how this works, visit an example leaderboard, such as the ImageNet leaderboard, and click the results icon on one of the rows.
This will take you to the table in the paper where the result comes from, as the animation below illustrates. The new interface also acts as our new paper result editor, where the community can add results from their own papers — and directly link them to the tables inside!
This interface is currently only available for arXiv papers with LaTeX source. We’re looking for feedback on this new editing interface, so please give it a go and let us know your thoughts.
For the past year, we’ve been researching ways to automatically extract results from machine learning papers. Today we have a new human-in-the-loop system for results extraction in production. Our model generates proposals for every arXiv ML paper which a human can accept or reject.
We’ve made this system practically viable by significantly increasing performance over the previous state-of-the-art. We believe this will improve results quality and coverage, allowing us to keep the community notified on new results in machine learning, even in niche and specialized subfields.
Our new interface and extraction model have allowed us to scale up the resource: as of today there are 800+ new leaderboards and 5500+ new results. This goes a long way towards achieving comprehensiveness — but our work is not done yet!
Under the freshly painted enclosures, the circuits stay the same. The Tubedreamer is an 808-style overdrive that can be a real fire-breather if you select the switchable high-gain stage. As for the new Custom Artwork versions, we like the looks of the Pac-Attack, which suggests that like the TS-808 overdrive, videogames were at their best in 1980.
As for the Harmonious Monk, this signature tremolo pedal for Mick Taylor and Dan Steinhardt of That Pedal Show is an all-analogue design with four core sounds courtesy of a a pair of selectable LFOs, plus its harmonic and amplitude modes.
You can use it for subtle movement, dial in vintage harmonic tremolo sounds, or go more extreme for unnatural staccato sounds. You can check out the Pink Drink redesign below. Finally, for the aspiring astrologists, we have the Ripply Fall modulation station with its Intrastellar artwork.
This conjoins Jam Pedals' WaterFall and Ripple pedals in one enclosure giving you an all-in-one chorus, vibrato and phaser with some clever features such as a third footswitch (positioned in the middle) that tripes the WaterFall's speed setting, allowing for some ring modulation madness.
Of course, at more subtle settings you can get a nice rotating speaker effect, add some lush movement, or add the old-school swoosh of the Ripple's phaser. Jonathan Horsley has been writing about guitars since 2005, playing them since 1990, and regularly contributes to MusicRadar, Total Guitar and Guitar World.
He uses Jazz III nylon picks, 10s during the week, 9s at the weekend, and shamefully still struggles with rhythm figure one of Van Halen’s Panama. Well, once more, both pedals feature all-original Fender circuit.
While these dual editions are a little bigger than the original models, they still look fairly compact, and arrive in the now-familiar anodized aluminium enclosure with LED-backlit knobs. It's funny that the Dual Pugilist Distortion now has the "Dual" assignation because the Pugilist was always a dual distortion pedal, with two gain engines and a blend knob to combine them.
Here, however, we have three modes of operation to expand upon this theme – Mute, Series and Parallel – and a newly designed 2-band master shelving EQ. These additional modes allow for some options on how to construct your gain.
You can stack them as you would two separate pedals, you can run one as your main tone and layer the other on top for, say, a big chorus riff, or you can blend the two distortions with each other or your clean sound until you find the right texture of breakup, from subtle heat and crunch to something a little more hostile to an easy listening audience.
The Dual Marine Layer Reverb, meanwhile, boasts three reverb types, which you can assign to two channels on the pedal, each with their own  damping, time, pre-delay and level controls, and access via two independent footswitchable settings.
Stevland Hardaway Morris (born May 13, 1950), known professionally as Stevie Wonder, is an American singer, songwriter, musician and record producer. Known as a prominent figure in popular music during the second half of the 20th century, he is one of the best-selling musicians of all time, with sales of over 100 million records worldwide.
A virtual one-man band, his use of synthesizers and further electronic musical instruments during the 1970s reshaped the conventions of R&B. He also helped drive the genre into the album era, crafting his LPs as cohesive, consistent socially conscious statements with complex compositions.
Wonder is often hailed as a "musical genius", and has been credited as a pioneer and influence to musicians of various genres including rhythm and blues, pop, soul, gospel, funk, and jazz.
Blind since shortly after his birth, Wonder was a child prodigy known as Little Stevie Wonder, leading him to sign with Motown's Tamla label at the age of 11. In 1963, the single "Fingertips" was a number-one hit on the Billboard Hot 100 when Wonder was 13, making him the youngest artist ever to top the chart.
Wonder's critical success was at its peak in the 1970s. His "classic period" began in 1972 with the releases of Music of My Mind and Talking Book, the latter featuring "Superstition", which is one of the most distinctive and famous examples of the sound of the Hohner Clavinet keyboard.
His works Innervisions (1973), Fulfillingness' First Finale (1974) and Songs in the Key of Life (1976) all won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year, making him the tied-record holder for the most Album of the Year wins, with three. He is also the only artist to have won the award with three consecutive album releases.
Wonder's "classic period", which culminated in 1976, was marked by his funky keyboard style, personal control of production, and use of integrated series of songs to make concept albums. In 1979, Wonder used Computer Music Inc.'s early music sampler, the Melodian, on his soundtrack album Stevie Wonder's Journey Through "The Secret Life of Plants".
This was his first digital recording and one of the earliest popular albums to use the technology, which Wonder used for all subsequent recordings. The pioneering stylistics of Wonder's 1970s albums are widely regarded as having influenced the shape of pop music in the following decade.
He has won 22 Grammy Awards. He was the first Motown artist and second African-American musician to win an Academy Award for Best Original Song, for the 1984 film The Woman in Red. Wonder has been inducted into the Rhythm and Blues Music Hall of Fame, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Songwriters Hall of Fame, and has received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
He is also noted for his work as an activist for political causes, including his 1980 campaign to make Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday a federal holiday in the United States.
In 2009, he was named a United Nations Messenger of Peace. In 2014, he was honored with the Presidential Medal of Freedom. In 2021, he was named as a founding inductee of the Black Music and Entertainment Walk of Fame. There's a problem with the state of Linux audio, and it's not that it doesn't always work. The issue is that it's overcomplicated.
This soon becomes evident if you sit down with a piece of paper and try to draw the relationships between the technologies involved with taking audio from a music file to your speakers: the diagram soon turns into a plate of knotted spaghetti.
This is a failure because there's nothing intrinsically more complicated about audio than any other technology. It enters your Linux box at one point and leaves at another. If we were drawing the OSI model used to describe the networking framework that connects your machine to every other machine on the network, we'd find clear strata, each with its own domain of processes and functionality.
There's very little overlap in layers, and you certainly don't find end-user processes in layer seven messing with the electrical impulses of the raw bitstreams in layer one.
Yet this is exactly what can happen with the Linux audio framework. There isn't even a clearly defined bottom level, with several audio technologies messing around with the kernel and your hardware independently.
Linux's audio architecture is more like the layers of the Earth's crust than the network model, with lower levels occasionally erupting on to the surface, causing confusion and distress, and upper layers moving to displace the underlying technology that was originally hidden.
The Open Sound Protocol, for example, used to be found at the kernel level talking to your hardware directly, but it's now a compatibility layer that sits on top of ALSA. ALSA itself has a kernel level stack and a higher API for programmers to use, mixing drivers and hardware properties with the ability to play back surround sound or an MP3 codec.
When most distributions stick PulseAudio and GStreamer on top, you end up with a melting pot of instability with as much potential for destruction as the San Andreas fault. As Maria von Trapp said, "Let's start at the very beginning." When it comes to modern Linux audio, the beginning is the Advanced Linux Sound Architecture, or ALSA.
This connects to the Linux kernel and provides audio functionality to the rest of the system. But it's also far more ambitious than a normal kernel driver; it can mix, provide compatibility with other layers, create an API for programmers and work at such a low and stable latency that it can compete with the ASIO and CoreAudio equivalents on the Windows and OS X platforms.
ALSA was designed to replace OSS. However, OSS isn't really dead, thanks to a compatibility layer in ALSA designed to enable older, OSS-only applications to run. It's easiest to think of ALSA as the device driver layer of the Linux sound system.
Your audio hardware needs a corresponding kernel module, prefixed with snd_, and this needs to be loaded and running for anything to happen. This is why you need an ALSA kernel driver for any sound to be heard on your system, and why your laptop was mute for so long before someone thought of creating a driver for it.
Fortunately, most distros will configure your devices and modules automatically. ALSA is responsible for translating your audio hardware's capabilities into a software API that the rest of your system uses to manipulate sound. It was designed to tackle many of the shortcomings of OSS (and most other sound drivers at the time), the most notable of which was that only one application could access the hardware at a time.
This is why a software component in ALSA needs to manages audio requests and understand your hardware's capabilities. If you want to play a game while listening to music from Amarok, for example, ALSA needs to be able to take both of these audio streams and mix them together in software, or use a hardware mixer on your soundcard to the same effect.
ALSA can also manage up to eight audio devices and sometimes access the MIDI functionality on hardware, although this depends on the specifications of your hardware's audio driver and is becoming less important as computers get more powerful.
Where ALSA does differ from the typical kernel module/device driver is in the way it's partly user-configurable. This is where the complexity in Linux audio starts to appear, because you can alter almost anything about your ALSA configuration by creating your own config file – from how streams of audio are mixed together and which outputs they leave your system from, to the sample rate, bit-depth and real-time effects.
ALSA's relative transparency, efficiency and flexibility have helped to make it the standard for Linux audio, and the layer that almost every other audio framework has to go through in order to communicate with the audio hardware.
This is the domain of PulseAudio – an attempt to bridge the gap between hardware and software capabilities, local and remote machines, and the contents of audio streams. It does for networked audio what ALSA does for multiple soundcards, and has become something of a standard across many Linux distros because of its flexibility.
As with ALSA, this flexibility brings complexity, but the problem is compounded by PulseAudio because it's more user-facing. This means normal users are more likely to get tangled in its web. Most distros keep its configuration at arm's length; with the latest release of Ubuntu, for example, you might not even notice that PulseAudio is installed.
If you click on the mixer applet to adjust your soundcard's audio level, you get the ALSA panel, but what you're really seeing is ALSA going to PulseAudio, then back to ALSA – a virtual device.
At first glance, PulseAudio doesn't appear to add anything new to Linux audio, which is why it faces so much hostility. It doesn't simplify what we have already or make audio more robust, but it does add several important features. It's also the catch-all layer for Linux audio applications, regardless of their individual capabilities or the specification of your hardware.
If all applications used PulseAudio, things would be simple. Developers wouldn't need to worry about the complexities of other systems, because PulseAudio brings cross-platform compatibility. But this is one of the main reasons why there are so many other audio solutions.
Unlike ALSA, PulseAudio can run on multiple operating systems, including other POSIX platforms and Microsoft Windows. This means that if you build an application to use PulseAudio rather than ALSA, porting that application to a different platform should be easy.
But there's a symbiotic relationship between ALSA and PulseAudio because, on Linux systems, the latter needs the former to survive. PulseAudio configures itself as a virtual device connected to ALSA, like any other piece of hardware. This makes PulseAudio more like Jack, because it sits between ALSA and the desktop, piping data back and forth transparently.
It also has its own terminology. Sinks, for instance, are the final destination. These could be another machine on the network or the audio outputs on your soundcard courtesy of the virtual ALSA. The parts of PulseAudio that fill these sinks are called 'sources' – typically audio-generating applications on your system, audio inputs from your soundcard, or a network audio stream being sent from another PulseAudio machine.
Unlike Jack, applications aren't directly responsible for adding and removing sources, and you get a finer degree of control over each stream. Using the PulseAudio mixer, for example, you can adjust the relative volume of every application passing through PulseAudio, regardless of whether that application features its own slider or not. This is a great way of curtailing noisy websites.
With GStreamer, Linux audio starts to look even more confusing. This is because, like PulseAudio, GStreamer doesn't seem to add anything new to the mix. It's another multimedia framework and gained a reasonable following of developers in the years before PulseAudio, especially on the Gnome desktop.
It's one of the few ways to install and use proprietary codecs easily on the Linux desktop. It's also the audio framework of choice for GTK developers, and you can even find a version handling audio on the Palm Pre.
GStreamer slots into the audio layers above PulseAudio (which it uses for sound output on most distributions), but below the application level. GStreamer is unique because it's not designed solely for audio – it supports several formats of streaming media, including video, through the use of plugins.
MP3 playback, for example, is normally added to your system through an additional codec download that attaches itself as a GStreamer plugin. The commercial Fluendo MP3 decoder, one of the only officially licenced codecs available for Linux, is supplied as a GStreamer plugin, as are its other proprietary codecs, including MPEG-2, H.264 and MPEG.
The best example is a virtual recording studio, where one application is responsible for grabbing the audio data and another for processing the audio with effects, before finally sending the resulting stream through a mastering processor to be readied for release. A real recording studio might use a web of cables, sometimes known as jacks, to build these connections. Jack does the same in software.
Jack is an acronym for 'Jack Audio Connection Kit'. It's built to be low-latency, which means there's no undue processing performed on the audio that might impede its progress. But for Jack to be useful, an audio application has to be specifically designed to handle Jack connections. As a result, it's not a simple replacement for the likes of ALSA and PulseAudio, and needs to be run on top of another system that will generate the sound and provide the physical inputs.
With most Jack-compatible applications, you're free to route the audio and inputs in whichever way you please. You could take the output from VLC, for example, and pipe it directly into Audacity to record the stream as it plays back. Or you could send it through JackRack, an application that enables you to build a tower of real-time effects, including pinging delays, cavernous reverb and voluptuous vocoding.
This versatility is fantastic for digital audio workstations. Ardour uses Jack for internal and external connections, for instance, and the Jamin mastering processor can only be used as part of a chain of Jack processes. It's the equivalent of having full control over how your studio is wired. Its implementation has been so successful on the Linux desktop that you can find Jack being put to similar use on OS X.
In the world of professional and semi-professional audio, many audio interfaces connect to their host machine using a FireWire port.
This approach has many advantages. FireWire is fast and devices can be bus powered. Many laptop and desktop machines have FireWire ports without any further modification, and the standard is stable and mostly mature. You can also take FireWire devices on the road for remote recording with a laptop and plug them back into your desktop machine when you get back to the studio.
But unlike USB, where there's a standard for handling audio without additional drivers, FireWire audio interfaces need their own drivers. The complexities of the FireWire protocol mean these can't easily create an ALSA interface, so they need their own layer.
Originally, this work fell to a project called FreeBOB. This took advantage of the fact that many FireWire audio devices were based on the same hardware. FFADO is the successor to FreeBOB, and opens the driver platform to many other types of FireWire audio interface.
Version 2 was released at the end of 2009, and includes support for many units from the likes of Alesis, Apogee, ART, CME, Echo, Edirol, Focusrite, M-Audio, Mackie, Phonic and Terratec. Which devices do and don't work is rather random, so you need to check before investing in one, but many of these manufacturers have helped driver development by providing devices for the developers to use and test.
Another neat feature in FFADO is that some the DSP mixing features of the hardware have been integrated into the driver, complete with a graphical mixer for controlling the balance of the various inputs and outputs. This is different to the ALSA mixer, because it means audio streams can be controlled on the hardware with zero latency, which is exactly what you need if you're recording a live performance.
Unlike other audio layers, FFADO will only shuffle audio between Jack and your audio hardware. There's no back door to PulseAudio or GStreamer, unless you run those against Jack. This means you can't use FFADO as a general audio layer for music playback or movies unless you're prepared to mess around with installation and Jack. But it also means that the driver isn't overwhelmed by support for various different protocols, especially because most serious audio applications include Jack support by default. This makes it one of the best choices for a studio environment.
We're starting to get into the niche geology of Linux audio. Xine is a little like the chalk downs; it's what's left after many other audio layers have been washed away. Most users will recognise the name from the very capable DVD movie and media player that most distributions still bundle, despite its age, and this is the key to Xine's longevity.
When Xine was created, the developers split it into a backend library to handle the media, and a front-end application for user interaction. It's the library that's persisted, thanks to its ability to play numerous containers, including AVI, Matroska and Ogg, and dozens of the formats they contain, such as AAC, Flac, MP3, Vorbis and WMA.
It does this by harnessing the powers of many other libraries. As a result, Xine can act as a catch-all framework for developers who want to offer the best range of file compatibility without worrying about the legality of proprietary codecs and patents.
Xine can talk to ALSA and PulseAudio for its output, and there are still many applications that can talk to Xine directly. The most popular are the Gxine front-end and Totem, but Xine is also the default back-end for KDE's Phonon, so you can find it locked to everything from Amarok to Kaffeine.
Phonon was designed to make life easier for developers and users by removing some of the system's increasing complexity. It started life as another level of audio abstraction for KDE 4 applications, but it was considered such a good idea that Qt developers made it their own, pulling it directly into the Qt framework that KDE itself is based on.
This had great advantages for developers of cross-platform applications. It made it possible to write a music player on Linux with Qt and simply recompile it for OS X and Windows without worrying about how the music would be played back, the capabilities of the sound hardware being used, or how the destination operating system would handle audio. This was all done automatically by Qt and Phonon, passing the audio to the CoreAudio API on OS X, for example, or DirectSound on Windows.
On the Linux platform (and unlike the original KDE version of Phonon), Qt's Phonon passes the audio to GStreamer, mostly for its transparent codec support. Phonon support is being quietly dropped from the Qt framework. There have been many criticisms of the system, the most common being that it's too simplistic and offers nothing new, although it's likely that KDE will hold on to the framework for the duration of the KDE 4 lifecycle.
There are many other audio technologies, including ESD, SDL and PortAudio. ESD is the Enlightenment Sound Daemon, and for a long time it was the default sound server for the Gnome desktop. Eventually, Gnome was ported to use libcanberra (which itself talks to ALSA, GStreamer, OSS and PulseAudio) and ESD was dropped as a requirement in April 2009.
Then there's Arts, the KDE equivalent of ESD, although it wasn't as widely supported and seemed to cause more problems than it solved. Most people have now moved to KDE 4, so it's no longer an issue.
SDL, on the other hand, is still thriving as the audio output component in the SDL library, which is used to create hundreds of cross-platform games. It supports plenty of features, and is both mature and stable.
PortAudio is another cross-platform audio library that adds SGI, Unix and Beos to the mix of possible destinations. The most notable application to use PortAudio is the Audacity audio editor, which may explain its sometimes unpredictable sound output and the quality of its Jack support.
And then there's OSS, the Open Sound System. It hasn't been a core Linux audio technology since version 2.4 of the kernel, but there's just no shaking it. This is partly because so many older applications are dependent on it and, unlike ALSA, it works on systems other than Linux. There's even a FreeBSD version.
It was a good system for 1992, but ALSA is nearly always recommended as a replacement. OSS defined how audio would work on Linux, and in particular, the way audio devices are accessed through the ioctl tree, as with /dev/dsp, for example.
ALSA features an OSS compatibility layer to enable older applications to stick to OSS without abandoning the current ALSA standard. The OSS project has experimented with open source and proprietary development, and is still being actively developed as a commercial endeavour by 4 Front Technologies. Build 2002 of OSS 4.2 was released in November 2009.
Creating a website used to be the domain (geddit?) of professional designers and coders, but thanks to free website builder applications, these days it's something anyone can tackle. We've already featured the best website builder software which includes paid-for services that include the widest range of features. However, there are some good free website builders out there.
The problem is that there are so many website creation applications and services vying for attention that it can be difficult to know which one to opt for – this is where we can help. We've collated the very best free website builders available, including a mixture of offline software and online tools.
It's usually quicker, easier and more efficient to create and edit a site entirely online with a WYSIWYG editor, but if you want complete control over every aspect of your site's design and web hosting, you'll need a desktop-based free website builder.
So whether you're looking to create a site for your business, a new blog, or you just fancy creating an online presence for yourself, here are the best free website builder services to help you out.
Wix is a big-name website builder which offers a free plan, enabling you to have the run of this service without having to put your hand in your pocket. And you benefit from one of the most impressive website editors in the business.
This editor can be run in ADI (Artificial Design Intelligence) mode, which has a very basic interface to keep everything really simple and user-friendly. This is great for beginners, as you can create a basic site without even remotely breaking a sweat (a range of attractive templates are provided, as well).
Those who want to get more involved with tweaking the design of their website can step up to the full Wix editor, which boasts powerful functionality, and the ability to really hone your website and get it looking just as you want. Visual previews of page elements make it easy to pick what you need for any particular part of a web page, too.
Wix is so polished that putting together your site using the editor feels more like using a native application rather than a website builder, and it also sports excellent support for a diverse range of media, and quality customer support as well, even on the free plan. In addition, Wix Turbo was recently released which improves the performance and speed of all Wix websites.
Powerful blogging functionality rounds things off nicely, and you’re getting a truly high quality offering with this freewebsite builder. Constant Contact provides an intelligent website builder and ecommerce store platform, both of which are free to use.
Setting up a website is easy using drag-and-drop functionality, allowing you to set up a design simply and easily, and insert the features you need. Settings are automatically optimized for mobile platforms and SEO, and there is a free image library with over 50,000 images included as part of the package.
The ecommerce platform allows for online payments through Paypal, Mollie, or Stripe. There are order and inventory features that automatically updates inventory with orders, and sends an email alert when items become out-of-stock.
While the basic level website is free, there are paid plans which add more features. Additionally, there is also a paid email marketing option available to allow you to reach new customers.
Overall, Constant Contact does a good job of setting up the basics. The free plan is a great way to set up your website, but if you want to publish a website, you'll need to pay. Weebly offers you two ways to build your website. Both involve creating it online, and both are as quick and painless as possible.
The simplest option is to use the basic editor builder which will guide you through a series of questions before automatically creating a site for you. There is scope for customization, but the focus here is really on fast results for anyone who is terrified of designing websites.
A more hands-on approach is available if you decide to use the standard Editor. There are literally hundreds of stylish templates to choose from – and, yes, they are genuinely impressive – which you can tweak and tailor to your needs using a beautiful WYSIWYG editor.
Despite being a cloud-based website builder, Weebly gives you a great degree of control over the look of your site and placement of page elements. You can also liven it up using additional features such as a newsletter and live chat. This power and flexibility make Weebly a good, free website builder to consider.
Causing a slight degree of confusion, there are actually two different versions of WordPress. The more complex variant can be downloaded from wordpress.org, and you will need to upload it to your own web space and install it using the automated online installer. You can then customize the templates and use add-ons to make the site your own.
This is the route many bloggers go down, but there is a simpler option for people who don’t want the hassle of fiddling about with scripts and getting dirty with hardcore editing.
The hosted version of WordPress lets you create your own site on wordpress.com. You can create everything from a blog or photo site, to a fully fledged online store, and there are a number of templates to choose from. Additionally, Mailchimp users have a benefit of adding a Mailchimp block, which can grow your mailing list among other things.
Whether you're creating a static site, or a blog-style site with regularly updated content, the online editor is a joy to use and allows just about anyone to create an impressive, professional-looking site. The only downside is the limited range of plugins and templates compared with the desktop version, and other free website builders.
Incomedia WebSite X5 received an overhaul in April 2019 with new templates, an updated interface, new paid versions and more. The main thing to note is that the service now has a free version for everyone (note that the free version for TechRadar readers is still available to download).
There are two paid versions, Evo and Pro, priced at $27.5 and $64.3 respectively. This is a one time purchase and naturally, both versions come with additional and improved features compared to the free one. There is also a demo version of both paid versions that you can try out.
Unlike WordPress and Wix, WebSite X5 is a desktop website builder, which means you can work on your site offline and have more freedom to make your website look exactly the way you want.
There's a range of ready-made templates to choose from, or you can create your own design from scratch. Next, build up your site map, showing the hierarchy of your pages and how they connect to one another – a feature you won't find in most web-based site builder apps. There is also e-commerce support with features like product search page and optimized checkout.
Once that's done, you're ready to start building your pages using Website X5's simple drag-and-drop interface, which includes tools for editing both rich text and photos. If you don't want to be tied down to subscription, WebSite X5 offers a free website builder that's easy to use.
CoffeeCup Free HTML Editor is one of a dying breed of web building programs that don't use a CMS (content management system). While not in the same league as the likes of Adobe Dreamweaver, Free HTML Editor packs quite a professional punch. With split screen code/preview views, it's possible to see the effect the changes you make have straight away.
To help you get started quickly, there are a number of templates built into the program, and there are some very nice features such as tag and code suggestions as you type.
For absolute beginners, the program might seem a little overwhelming to start with, but it's worth sticking with – assuming you have some HTML knowledge. There is one slight issue; a number of features, such as spell-checking and code optimization, are only included in the paid-for version of the program. Otherwise, it can make for a simple alternative to a free website builder.
Joomla is a well-known name in the CMS world. It may not be as popular as WordPress, but it offers the same two options: build a site using the web app at launch.joomla.org and have it hosted on the company's servers, or download the software from joomla.org and host it yourself.
If you choose the latter option, you'll notice that the interface is much less approachable than WordPress. It's not completely impenetrable, but there are lots of menus and options to work through and it doesn't feel quite as polished as WordPress.
Joomla's free website builder is nearly as complex, but doesn't involve the same setup process, making it a better option for beginners. Its key selling point is a huge collection of themes and extensions, which provide endless ways to customize the way your site looks and works.
Linux hosting is everywhere. Whether you're looking for a simple shared web hosting account or a powerful dedicated server, the chances are that you'll be offered a Linux-based option first.
In many cases, you might not care. If your hosting needs are simple, you'll probably choose an account based on the allocated web space, bandwidth and similar features – the operating system is so far down most people's priority list that often it's not even mentioned in comparison tables.
But if you're an experienced user, know more about Linux, or you perhaps need to build a technically complex website where you have full control over everything, it's a different story.
You might want to choose your preferred distro or control panel. You could need more control over the server and its components. Hosts may throw in all kinds of goodies to get you started – a firewall, mail server, private DNS – and offer quality support to keep your site up and running.
Every web host has its own idea of what makes a great Linux package, but we've listed five of our favorite providers to point you in the right direction. Keep reading to find out more. InMotion Hosting is a professional Linux web host which delivers high levels of power and control right across its range.
InMotion's shared hosting includes many beginner-friendly features, for example – free website migration, a bundled website builder, regular backups – but that's just the start. More experienced users will be happy to see support for MySQL and PostreSQL databases, PHP 7, Ruby, Perl and Python, SSH access and more.
There are interesting touches wherever you look. You don't just get the option to have WordPress, PrestaShop or Joomla preinstalled, for instance – InMotion throws in WP-CLI to enable managing multiple WordPress installations from the command line. It's a far more capable product than you might expect, considering prices start at $4.99 a month for the three-year plan.
It's a similar story as you upgrade. Optional self-managed cloud VPS hosting – from $5 a month for the initial term – gives you a choice of OS and a firewall, but after that, you're able to install, optimize and configure the server however you like. Even InMotion's managed VPS hosting still gives you root access for considerable low-level control.
For the operating system, you get to choose from CentOS, Ubuntu or Debian. If you encounter any setup issues, the Launch Assist feature gives you a minimum of two hours with an InMotion tech support staff member to help you solve any problems, which could prove invaluable in getting you off the ground.
Every Linux host claims to offer the best possible technical support, but separating the experts from the pretenders isn't always easy. One way to identify the most knowledgeable providers is to check their high-end products. You won't get the same level of support if you're buying a basic shared hosting package, but just knowing that level of expertise is available somewhere in the company can be a comfort.
SiteGround is a sterling example. If the company's standard hosting products aren't enough, it can build enterprise-level solutions from scratch, and SiteGround's website lists some of the technologies it supports.
That includes custom private clouds, smart use of Linux containers, replication between databases, and in-depth expertise in WordPress, Drupal, Nginx, Apache, PHP, MySQL, MongoDB, ElasticSearch, Redis, Solr, Memcached and more. In short, this is clearly a provider that knows what it's doing.
Home users won't get the same level of support, of course, but even SiteGround's shared hosting plan delivers more than you might expect: a free Let's Encrypt SSL certificate, cPanel and SSH access, Cloudflare integration, unlimited emails and databases, HTTP/2-enabled servers, free daily backups, and 24/7 technical support by phone, chat and a ticket system. Not bad at $4.99 (£2.99 in the UK) a month plus tax for the initial term, $14.99 (£11.99 in the UK) afterwards.
Ramping up to a VPS-like Cloud Hosting plan gets you a very well-specified CentOS system. MySQL 5, PostgreSQL, 5 PHP versions, HHVM, Apache, Nginx, Exim mail server, a private DNS server setup and Iptables firewall are all preinstalled and managed by SiteGround. Prices start at $100 (£60 in the UK) a month plus tax.
Opt for a dedicated server and you'll get high-end extras like Git integration and performance-boosting Nginx-based cache options for WordPress, Memcached and HHVM.
Now, the truth is that you probably won't want all these features – maybe you only need a small number of them – but they do provide a strong indicator of the company's technical expertise, as we already mentioned.
If you're looking for a provider that can support your site and help it grow, SiteGround could be a wise choice, for sure. On top of all the above, there is a 30-day money-back guarantee in case you're not happy with the service initially, plus there's a 100% renewable energy match scheme on the green front (meaning this is a carbon neutral host).
Linux hosting is available from just about everyone, but anything less than a dedicated server is often fully managed by the provider (they set up, manage and maintain the OS and all its components for you). That's great for beginners, but more experienced users might be frustrated by the lack of features and control therein.
Hostwinds' unmanaged VPS packages allow you to take complete charge of your workspace. You can choose from a range of distros, including CentOS, Ubuntu, openSUSE, Debian and Fedora. You can tweak and set up the operating system however you like, as well as configure your own backup scheme, and more.
That said, remember that unmanaged packages bring responsibilities, too. If there's a missing update or some mystery software issue, you'll be the person tasked with fixing the problem. But that shouldn't be too intimidating for Linux users, and many elements of Hostwinds' packages remain simple and easy-to-use (you get site management via cPanel, automated WordPress and other installs via Softaculous, one-click Nextcloud install, and so on).
Even better, as you're not paying for management, Hostwinds gives you a 25% discount on every package. Normal managed Linux VPS packages range from $8.24 monthly (with initial discount at the time of writing – the normal cost is $10.99) for 1 CPU core, 1GB RAM, 30GB disk space, 1TB traffic, stepping up to $395.24 (with discount) for 16 cores, 96GB RAM, 750GB disk space, and 9TB traffic.
The unmanaged range runs from $4.99 monthly to $328.99. There's no long-term contract required, so you can try the service for as little as a month to see if it works for you, which is obviously very handy.
Part of the appeal of Linux hosting should be the level of control you get over your working environment, but this doesn't happen with every provider. Often you're presented with a standard base environment – typically CentOS and cPanel – with no ability to choose anything else.
Liquid Web has been providing quality VPS and dedicated hosting packages for years, and one reason for this success could be the level of flexibility on offer. Whatever you're after, the company gives you in-depth low-level control over your server specifications.
You're not stuck with a single version of CentOS, for instance. Liquid Web offers CentOS 6 (optionally with CloudLinux) and 7, as well as Debian 8, 9 and 10, Ubuntu 16.04 and 18.04, and Fedora 30. The CentOS 7 images can include cPanel or Plesk, and plans are available in a mix of self-managed, core-managed and fully-managed variations.
There's even more power over some supplementary features. While other hosts might throw in a standard backup plan, Liquid Web enables choosing how many daily backups you'd like to retain, or it can squeeze as many backups as will fit into a defined amount of disk space. Both options are charged at a very reasonable $0.08 per GB per month, so you only pay for whatever you use.
However your server is configured, Liquid Web's excellent support is on hand 24/7, every day of the year, to resolve problems as quickly as possible. And we do mean quickly: if, say, there's a hardware failure, the company promises it will be rectified within 30 minutes of the problem being identified.
What's more, Liquid Web backs up these promises with an impressive service level agreement. If the company doesn't respond to an initial helpdesk ticket within 30 minutes, you'll be credited with 10 times the amount they missed it by, and there are similar clauses to cover you for power outages, network failure and more. All of this has to boost your confidence in the level of service which will be delivered if you choose Liquid Web for Linux hosting.
It’s not easy to pick the right Linux web host, particularly given the bewildering number of features which are on offer with some providers – and this can prove to be a real struggle for hosting newbies who really aren’t sure which of these various features they might need.
So rather than make a big commitment, those in this predicament might want to sign up with a budget host such as OVH, to get a feel for the kind of Linux options which are out there. While we wouldn’t recommend this company for business-critical websites – in all honesty, it doesn’t have the best customer support out there – OVH represents superb value for money in terms of what you get, and as mentioned, it’s a cheap way of testing out the world of Linux hosting.
OVH offers plenty in the way of Linux options, and, for example, there's a diverse selection of distros you can pick from. The firm's VPS plans support Arch Linux, CentOS 6, CentOS 7, Debian 7, Debian 8, Debian 9, Fedora 26, Ubuntu 14.04 Server and Ubuntu 16.04 Server, along with Kubuntu 14.04 Desktop if you need a user interface.
You're not restricted to cPanel as a website manager, either: OVH also supports CozyCloud, Plesk Onyx, Vesta CP and Virtualmin.
OVH says you can have WordPress, Drupal, Joomla! and PrestaShop pre-installed, conveniently, although there's no mention of a general Softaculous-type one-click application installer. Still, with full root access you should be able to manually set up whatever you need.
What's really impressive here is the price, which starts at just $2.20 per month, excluding sales tax. OVH isn't the best Linux host by any means, but it does provide a very cheap way to experiment with different distros and control panels to find out what works for you. It's well worth a look for Linux newbies or anyone who feels they need more hosting experience before handing over substantial chunks of cash.
Once called a “native cat” by European colonists, the quolls (genus Dasyurus) are among Australia’s last living carnivorous marsupials. Often overshadowed by their better-known cousins the Tasmanian devils and thylacine, quolls have a 15 million year history in Australia, balancing ecosystems by suppressing prey species and cleaning up carrion.
Unfortunately, quolls have been hard-hit by humans. Populations of most species have declined drastically in the modern era. One species, the eastern quoll (Dasyurus viverrinus), is even thought to have gone extinct in mainland Australia in the late 20th century due to a combination of disease, predation by the introduced red fox and persecution by humans.
Today, wild populations of this species are isolated to Tasmania. However, an ambitious program is underway to reintroduce eastern quolls to their native range on mainland Australia, by translocating captive-bred animals from Tasmania and mainland sanctuaries.
The reintroduction, which has recently been tested at Booderee National Park on the NSW south coast, provided valuable data to make this goal a reality. Even so, major challenges to the reestablishment of viable mainland quoll populations remain. One possible challenge is the potential for local adaptation among donor quoll populations to the unique environment of Tasmania.
The island represents the most southern and coldest part of the eastern quoll’s historical range, and native populations have been evolving in isolation there for around 14,000 years, since the peak of the last ice age or Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). While helpful for surviving in Tasmania, these same adaptations may actually be disadvantageous in warmer, drying climates on mainland Australia.
Now, our team of researchers, spanning several universities including UniMelb, UTAS and ANU, have produced the first-ever genome sequence for the eastern quoll. We have done this with the help of WWF-Australia’s Rewilding Unit and Taronga Zoo who provided samples collected at Aussie Ark, a captive-breeding centre and semi-wild safe haven for eastern quolls.
This chromosome-scale genome assembly built using Dovetail Genomic’s Omni-C technology represents the chromosomes of the quoll’s DNA as strings of letters that can be used as reference for studies of local adaptation.
Moreover, by mapping all of the quoll’s genes, it is now possible to identify genetic variation across both living and extinct quoll populations in ways that improve their genetic management in the wild as well as in captive breeding and release programs.
This work is one part of the Wild Genomes program, a major international effort by the non-profit organization Revive & Restore. Their mission is to promote genetic rescue in environmentally-critical species through the integration of cutting-edge techniques and technologies into biodiversity conservation.
Revive & Restore’s prescient insights into the future of conservation biology helped create a unique opportunity to produce genomic resources for a variety of ecologically vital endangered species, and their support has already paid dividends.
While eastern quoll genomics is still in its infancy, our team has already used our new genomic resource to begin examining the history of eastern quoll population declines in Australia. We do this using a clever approach.
Most animals have 2 copies of every chromosome, one from their mother and one from their father. With the exception of the sex chromosomes (X and Y), each pair of chromosomes contains nearly the same DNA. This is because all chromosome pairs ultimately share a common ancestry.
Occasionally though, random mutations create small numbers of changes in the letters of the DNA of one chromosome, making it slightly different from its pair. These mutations accumulate over generations at a fairly steady rate.
By comparing this record of mutations between segments of chromosome pairs in the eastern quoll genome to information about mutation rate (how frequently mutations occur per generation) and the generation time of a species, we are able to estimate how long ago two chromosomes diverged from each other. Time periods when many chromosome segments share a common origin represent population bottlenecks, where population sizes decreased.
Using this approach, our research team found that eastern quolls underwent two periods of accelerated decline in population size prior to European colonization, with the most recent occurring near the end of the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). The LGM was a period of exceptionally cold climate, and its end heralded significant rises in sea level that trapped populations of many species on islands.
This finding shows the profound genetic fingerprint left in the DNA of eastern quolls by their isolation in Tasmania. The team’s next task is to decipher how these fingerprints have contributed to genetic differences between living Tasmanian eastern quolls and their tragically extinct mainland relatives.
Moving forward, the team also plans to use their powerful new genomic resources to guide expanded population-genetic studies of eastern quolls that can lead to improved genetic management of both wild and captive-bred quolls.
Rob Brewster, WWF-Australia’s Rewilding Program Manager, whose major focus is on improving the outlook for the eastern quoll across the full management spectrum for the species is excited by this prospect.
“By combining applied ecosystem restoration ecology with the latest in DNA science, we may one day see eastern quolls return home to mainland Australia and resume the ecosystem services they’ve provided for millions of years”.
Scientists at the US Department of Energy’s flagship laser facility shattered their own record earlier this month by generating more than 10 quadrillion watts of fusion power for a fraction of a second — roughly 700 times the generating capacity of the entire US electrical grid at any given moment. News of the breakthrough has revived hopes that the long-troubled National Ignition Facility (NIF) might yet attain its goal of producing more energy than it consumes in a sustained fusion reaction.
Housed at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, the US$3.5-billion facility wasn’t designed to serve as a power-plant prototype, however, but rather to probe fusion reactions at the heart of thermonuclear weapons.
After the United States banned underground nuclear testing at the end of the cold war in 1992, the energy department proposed the NIF as part of a larger science-based Stockpile Stewardship Program, designed to verify the reliability of the country’s nuclear weapons without detonating any of them.
With this month’s laser-fusion breakthrough, scientists are cautiously optimistic that the NIF might live up to its promise, helping physicists to better understand the initiation of nuclear fusion — and thus the detonation of nuclear weapons.
“That’s really the scientific question for us at the moment,” says Mark Herrmann, Livermore’s deputy director for fundamental weapons physics. “Where can we go? How much further can we go?” Here Nature looks at the NIF’s long journey, what the advance means for the energy department’s stewardship programme and what lies ahead. How does the NIF achieve nuclear fusion?
Ten storeys high and spanning the area of three American football fields, the NIF houses an array of optics and mirrors that amplify and split an initial pulse of photons into 192 ultraviolet laser beams, ultimately focusing them onto a target that is smaller than a pencil eraser.
The beams hit the target — a gold cylinder — with around 1.9 megajoules of energy in less than 4 billionths of a second, creating temperatures and pressures seen only in stars and thermonuclear bombs. Faced with this pulse power, the cylinder, which holds a frozen pellet of deuterium and tritium, collapses as the hydrogen isotopes at the pellet’s core heat up, fuse and generate helium nuclei, neutrons and electromagnetic radiation.
The goal is to unleash a cascade of particles that leads to more fusion and more particles, thus creating a sustained fusion reaction; by definition, ‘ignition’ occurs when the fusion reaction generates more energy than it consumes.
Preliminary results from the experiment on 8 August indicate that fusion reactions generated a record-shattering 70% of the power that went into the experiment — nearly achieving ignition. The NIF began operations in 2009. Why has it taken so long to (nearly) achieve ignition?
Nobody said it would be easy, but building the NIF proved to be a more complex endeavour than officials originally thought. Construction began in 1997 and ended more than a decade later, several years behind schedule and at least $2.4 billion over budget.
The NIF missed its goal of achieving ignition by 2012; scientists have spent the years since fine-tuning the facility and introducing optimized targets into the reaction chamber. The recent success was achieved after multiple changes to the massive system, including new diagnostics, improved target-fabrication techniques and enhancements to the precision of the lasers.
Long before the NIF fired its first shot, it was surrounded by controversy. Independent scientists raised questions about both the design and management of the facility. As recently as May 2016, the US National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), a branch of the Department of Energy (DOE) that oversees nuclear weapons and funds the NIF to the tune of around $350 million per year, questioned whether the facility would ever achieve its ignition goal.
But even long-time critics of the facility have acknowledged the recent breakthrough as a significant step forward. Stephen Bodner, a plasma physicist who formerly worked at the US Naval Research Laboratory in Washington DC, said he is both “surprised and pleased” with the result — assuming it’s reproducible. “I look forward to reading the scientific report that explains it,” he says.
The Livermore team and its collaborators are just beginning to pore over results, but preliminary data suggest an eight-fold increase in energy yield compared with experiments conducted several months ago, and a 25-fold increase compared with the previously reported record, set in 2018.
Laboratory officials said they made the announcement about the experiment before peer-reviewed publication because news of the results was already spreading through the fusion community. If the NIF achieves full ignition, what could the results teach scientists about nuclear weapons?
In theory, the NIF could offer a better understanding of the precise conditions necessary to initiate and sustain a fusion reaction — which is, in a sense, what the facility’s scientists have been working out as they’ve optimized the system over the past 12 years. This question is also at the heart of the stockpile stewardship programme.
Since 1992, physicists have been building a comprehensive programme to study the US nuclear arsenal with increasingly powerful supercomputers and dozens of other research facilities designed to test everything from nuclear materials and components to explosives. Although the NIF is not detonating miniature bombs, says Herrmann, its experiments could help scientists improve the computer models they use to simulate how weapons will detonate, potentially reducing uncertainties.
Other experiments might test how the electronics and other components in a weapon hold up in the face of intense bursts of radiation expected in a hostile war environment.
Many scientists argue that the facility also bolsters confidence in the nation’s weapons stockpile — and wards off external threats — by helping to attract young researchers to the nuclear field and maintaining a broader scientific enterprise. “There is an overall element of showing scientific prowess that is important as well,” says Herrmann.
But is the NIF essential to the US stockpile stewardship programme? Some critics have questioned whether scientists need the facility to maintain the United States’ nuclear weapons.
They say the stewardship programme has already bolstered confidence in the stockpile within the NNSA, and point out that the agency is now proposing to build what are effectively new nuclear weapons, rather than simply maintaining the current cache with minimal changes.
“That shows either an enormous amount of hubris, or an incredible confidence that you can build a lot of what we need for the next 50 years, even without a functioning NIF,” says Hans Kristensen, who heads the nuclear information project at the Federation of American Scientists in Washington DC.
Herrmann argues that the NIF can still help, though. He says nuclear weapons scientists are constantly extrapolating from limited experimental data as they evaluate their computer simulations.
Information gathered from more energetic fusion reactions at the NIF, he says, will allow them to test the models more directly, hopefully reducing uncertainties and making it easier for the NNSA to certify that weapons in the arsenal will detonate if needed, and not before. So what happens next for the NIF? The ultimate test — whether the team can replicate its 8 August success — could come as early as October, say laboratory officials.
Meanwhile, scientists are rushing to understand and publish their findings.  Because the facility is operating at the scientific edge of what is possible, even slight variations in the manufacture of the target capsule or the tuning of the lasers could cause the system to produce more, or less, energy than the earlier experiment, says Herrmann.
“We can’t do the exact same target experiment, because we blew the target up,” he says. But with time, he adds, the science team should be able to repeat and build on this success — and push the facility even further. Scientists discover endophytic bacteria that can survive the unfavorable interior of passion fruit seeds and get transmitted to the seedlings on germination
Plant endophytic microorganisms, especially those growing inside seeds, can survive antimicrobial compounds and have attracted attention for their potential biocatalytic activity.
Recently, researchers from Japan successfully isolated several strains of endophytic bacteria that survive in high concentrations of antimicrobial resveratrol and piceatannol inside passion fruit seeds and get transmitted to next-generation seedlings. One of the bacteria could convert resveratrol and piceatannol to their respective derivatives. These findings will significantly advance endophyte and biocatalyst research.
Similar to the well-known human gut-resident microbes, the inside of a plant can also shelter microorganisms. Residing inside roots, stems, leaves, fruits, and even seeds, and developing a synergistic relationship with their host, these ‘endophytic’ microorganisms need not necessarily harm the plant.
Instead, they are often beneficial in germination, growth, and defense. However, plant interiors also contain many “secondary metabolites”, which are natural bioactive compounds that have strong antimicrobial properties, making this environment typically hostile for microorganisms.
Now, for the first time ever, a research group consisting of Dr. Toshiki Furuya, Associate Professor at the Department of Applied Biological Science, Tokyo University of Science, Japan, has succeeded in isolating bacteria from the seeds of passion fruit (Passiflora edulis).
Their research, which also unearths the surviving mechanisms of these bacteria inside the seeds, has been published in the journal MicrobiologyOpen. In their study, the scientists focused on the seeds of P. edulis.
The seeds of this fruit are full of secondary metabolites with strong antimicrobial properties, such as resveratrol and piceatannol — the latter present at high levels of up to 2.2 mg/g. As Dr. Furuya reveals the rationale behind choosing passion fruit seeds for the study, “The extraordinarily high concentration of piceatannol protects P. edulis seeds from microorganisms. We thought it would be interesting to know if any endophytic microorganism could survive this extreme environment, and if yes, how.”
Earlier reports showed that endophytes capable of surviving in an environment rich in biologically active compounds possessed biocatalytic activities related to the metabolism of these compounds. The fact that their biocatalytic potential could be exploited for therapeutic purposes made the scientists even more eager to explore the presence of endophytic bacteria.
The scientists collected and surface-sterilized the seeds of naturally grown P. edulis before either cutting or crushing them and placing them on solid agar-based growth media to check for microbial growth. While no microbial colony appeared from the cut or homogenized seeds, interestingly, the seedlings sprouting from the cut seeds, when exposed to growth media, gave rise to microbial colonies.
The scientists then performed sequencing to identify the bacteria that appeared on the agar plate. The findings were remarkable. From the seedlings, the scientists isolated 19 strains, including three previously unreported strains of bacteria from various genera.
They hypothesized that inside the seeds, piceatannol exerted bacteriostatic (or “bacterial growth-stalling”) rather than bactericidal (or “bacteria-killing”) effects on the residing bacteria. Ms. Aoi Ishida, the co-author of the study explains: “Due to the presence of a high concentration of piceatannol, the growth of the bacteria was stagnated inside the seed, but when transmitted to the next-generation seedlings during germination, the bacteria were relieved from the effect of piceatannol and able to grow again.”
The scientists also found one of the bacteria, Brevibacterium sp. PE28–2, to possess the ability to convert resveratrol and piceatannol to their respective derivatives. This is the first endophyte shown to exhibit such activity.
Dr. Furuya and Ms. Ishida are very hopeful that the method established in this study is expected to be effective in isolating several useful endophytic bacteria from a variety of plants. Moreover, considering the current focus on engineering new biomolecules with diverse applications, the results of this study would accelerate research on seed endophytic bacteria.
Heart rate variability (HRV) biofeedback training promises to strengthen the response of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) and increase adaptability and resilience, physiologically as well as mentally.
It relies on the strong coupling between breath and heart, and more specifically the fact that slow breathing at a certain frequency — the resonance frequency — triggers a strong physiological heart rate response. On the inhale the heart beat speeds up and on the exhale it slows down, leading to a high HRV and training the ANS to be more adaptable.
I recently wrote about the exact biomechanical mechanisms that underly this response. The basic idea behind finding your resonance frequency is that you breathe at various different frequencies for a certain amount of time and then identify which frequency led to the strongest response, i.e. the highest HRV.
HRV can be quantified in a number of different ways, but throughout this article we will assume RMSSD, the root mean square of successive differences between heartbeats in milliseconds, as our metric of choice. When I first got started with HRV biofeedback training I used my Oura Ring and its Moment feature to try and estimate my resonance frequency. I wrote about the experience in this piece.
While the Oura Ring is a great device, it was designed and optimized for sleep tracking, and as a result performs quite poorly at measuring HRV over short timespans during the day. Nonetheless, using the ring’s limited data I estimated that my resonance frequency was at around 6 breaths per minute, which is often cited as the most common resonance frequency.
Having practiced at this frequency for several months, I decided to “graduate” to Marco Altini’s HRV4Biofeedback app, and pairing it with a Polar H10 heart rate sensor. The app offers an in-built mode to determine your resonance frequency. Over the course of six minutes it transitions from 7.5 breaths per minute to 5 breaths per minute in steps of 0.5 and identifies the rate with the highest HRV.
Using this app and the much more accurate sensor I revised my resonance frequency estimate to around 5.5 breaths per minute. This level of detail is probably sufficient for most people, but I wanted to go a step further. A resolution of 0.5 breaths per minute just didn’t seem accurate enough.
As a result, when I started building a prototype for my own Yudemon HRV Biofeedback app (which also uses the Polar H10 to get real-time ECG data), I included some functionality that would allow me to experiment much more extensively and determine my resonance frequency with significantly higher confidence and precision. Below is a screenshot of the current prototype of the Yudemon HRV app with a resonance frequency scan session in progress.
The controls at the bottom left allow me to determine the parameters of the scan. In this case I am scanning in the range of 5.0 and 6.5 breaths per minute in steps of 0.1, with 90 seconds at each rate. I also chose a random order rather than going from high to low or low to high like most other apps, since I wanted to avoid any bias that might come from this gradual progression (more on this below).
Once a session is complete, the app switches to an Analysis mode that allows me to look at the results, see average metrics, as well as compare the different breathing frequencies and determine the resonance frequency. It can do this for single sessions, but more interestingly also combine multiple sessions to get more statistically significant results. The below screenshot shows the Analysis view for four selected sessions.
Since I expected my resonance frequency to be somewhere around 5.5 breaths per minute, I chose the 5.0 to 6.5 breaths per minute range for my self-study. Note that I fixed the inhale/exhale ratio at 40%/60% (like most other apps do). Varying this ratio to see if there is also a “resonance ratio” is a future experiment I want to explore.
HRV measurements are very sensitive and can be influenced by a number of factors besides breathing, from measurement noise like erratic heartbeats and sensor inaccuracies, to genuine changes in HRV due to thoughts and emotions or environmental stimuli like light and sound.
As a result, a single scan — as is the common practice — might be somewhat informative but can not really be considered an accurate measurement of resonance frequency. Hence I chose to combine the data of 20 sessions, spread over ten individual days with one session in the morning and one session in the evening each, to get a more accurate estimate.
The values at the top indicate the breathing rate of that particular interval, and the values below are the corresponding HRV, also shown by the dashed red line. Highlighted in green is the interval with the highest HRV, indicating that session’s resonance frequency. In this case 5.4 breaths per minute with a RMSSD of 184.6 ms.
Zooming in to this interval shows that at this breathing rate, my heart rate varied from just above 40 bpm on the exhale to over 90 bpm on the inhale. The red curve shows my average HRV at each breathing frequency, and the corresponding box plots give insights into the data distribution across sessions. According to this, my mean HRV was highest for 5.4 breaths/min, and the median was highest for 5.3 breaths/min.
In addition, the blue curve in the background shows the average power spectrum of my heart rate oscillations. While the breathing rate can be seen as the visual input that I tried to follow during each session, the power spectrum essentially shows the response of my heart. This overall power spectrum peaks at 5.349 breaths/min.
Putting these two observations together I can now quite confidently conclude that my resonance frequency is between 5.3 and 5.4 breaths per minute. Instead of looking at absolute HRV values, we can also normalize each session’s values by the highest value during that session.
While there are some small differences, my resonance frequency seems to be fairly stable across the day at around 5.4 breaths/min or just below. The most notable difference between morning and evening is the higher variance in the evening data. This is to be expected. My morning’s were very controlled. I usually got up, had a coffee and read for 30 minutes to an hour, and then did the biofeedback session. In the evening there was considerably more variability.
Sometimes I practiced before dinner, sometimes after. In some cases I did a heavy workout before the sessions, on other days I didn’t do much at all. On one day I even had two beers before the evening session (and the result was quite shocking, my average HRV was around 40 ms; this session is responsible for all the bottom outliers in the plots above).
One thing I was curious about was to see if my HRV naturally shifted over the course of a session. My assumption was that maybe the longer a session lasts, the more relaxed I get and as a result the higher my HRV, independent of breathing frequency.
That’s the reason why I ordered the rates at random during each session, rather than going from high to low or low to high. The graph below shows HRV across the consecutive 90 second intervals in each session.
However, in both cases, ten data points are simply nowhere near enough to draw any useful conclusions about potential correlations, and to be honest the plots above are rather pointless. And this concludes my initial study into determining my own resonance frequency. From now on I will be using a breathing rate of 5.4 breaths/min during my HRV biofeedback sessions.
In terms of further developing the app and the underlying technology, I will now start experimenting with sound and music generation based on real-time physiological data during the biofeedback session (and if you’d like to see a little sneak peek of that, check out this video).
I’ve recently had a few people ask me if they can use the Yudemon HRV Biofeedback app, and I’m super happy and grateful for that.
Unfortunately, the app is currently only for my own development. This allows me to move much faster and experiment more freely. However, eventually I am planning to release the app (or license the core technology to existing tools). But if there is enough interest I might try to make it available sooner rather than later.
Heart rate variability (HRV) biofeedback training and resonance breathing are based on the fact that our breathing has a direct impact on the rest of our physiology, specifically our heart. In this short article I will outline the mechanisms behind this.
The process begins with the diaphragm.On the inhale, the diaphragm moves downward, creating more space in the chest cavity and — like the plunger in a syringe — sucking in air.But not only does this additional space pull air into your lungs, it also decreases the pressure on the heart and allows it to physically expand
An atmosphere is the protective layer of gases found around many celestial objects, providing shelter from the harshness of space. They are vast, complex, and deeply interconnected systems. In fact, scientists require some of the most powerful computers in existence to research and model atmospheric processes.
They can be hellish, hot, and toxic places such as the one found on Venus. Cold, almost eventless, and very thin like the one found of Mars. Or they can be the perfect balance of factors to provide a life supporting environment like the one found on Earth.
Our atmosphere consists of nitrogen (~78%), oxygen (~21%), argon (~1%) and trace amounts of other gases including carbon dioxide and methane. This amalgamation of gases stretches approximately 100 kilometres above the Earth’s surface to the Karmen line, the distinguishing point between our atmosphere and space.
Atmospheric Layers. The atmosphere is split into 4 main layers which are largely defined by their temperature profiles. They are listed below. Troposphere: Contains approximately 70% of the mass of the atmosphere and almost all weather occurs within this layer.
Stratosphere: Accounts for approximately 24% of the Earth’s total atmosphere and 90% of the ozone layer is found in this layer. Mesosphere: The coolest of the layers. Thermosphere: Has the highest average temperature. Temperature Changes. Earth’s atmosphere has an unusual, counter intuitive temperature profile. As anyone who has climbed a mountain will have experienced, temperature decreases with altitude.
It would be logical to assume that this trend would continue throughout the atmosphere, but this is not the case. In the stratosphere and thermosphere, we see rapid increases in temperature and in this section, we will explore what causes the change in temperature for each of the atmospheric layers.
Troposphere: This layer is warmed by convection patterns which loose energy with an increase in altitude. Convection patterns form when the Earth’s surface warms the air closest to the ground which in turn rises and dissipates its energy into the surrounding air. As such the temperature drops on average 6 degrees centigrade for every 1000 meters gained in elevation.
Stratosphere: As noted previously, much of the ozone layer is found in the stratosphere. The ozone layer is vital in protecting all living things from harmful ultraviolet radiation from the Sun. Ozone molecules absorb this radiation which causes a temperature increase with increasing altitude.
Mesosphere: Temperatures in this layer decrease with altitude simply because there are fewer gas molecules in the mesosphere to absorb the Sun’s radiation.
Thermosphere: The thermosphere is such low density that it only takes a few molecules to be heated by the Sun to have a dramatic impact on the average temperature. Though the thermosphere has high temperature, it does not feel hot. This is because temperature is a measure of the energy of particles and not human perception.
Greenhouse Effect. The presence of greenhouse gases in our atmosphere is vital to our survival. Without them Earth would look more like Mars which can experience temperature changes from 20 to -70 degrees centigrade as day turns to night.
However, too many greenhouse gases in an atmosphere creates an environment like that of Venus which has a surface temperature of approximately 450 degrees centigrade.
Greenhouse gases do not absorb radiation arriving from the Sun, instead they absorb the energy emitted from the surface of the planet once it has been heated by the Sun, to understand why we need to look at atmospheric opacity.
Atmospheric opacity is a measure of how much radiation is absorbed in the atmosphere at different frequencies. An opacity of 0% would be no absorption and 100% complete absorption.Radiation from the Sun arrives at high frequencies (visible radiation), too high to be absorbed by the greenhouse gases as they enter the atmosphere.
However, radiation from the Earth’s surface is emitted at much lower frequencies (infrared radiation) which can be absorbed by gases such as carbon dioxide (wavelength of 14.285 micrometres). As such energy which has entered the atmosphere cannot always escape back to space resulting in a warming effect for the planet.
Band Saturation Effect. This selective absorption of infrared radiation by greenhouse gases leads to the band saturation effect, which makes rare, trace gases like methane disproportionally powerful relative to higher-concentration gases like carbon dioxide.
The greater the concentration of a greenhouse gas already present in the atmosphere, the lower the sensitivity to adding more of the same gas. In short, the first molecules of a greenhouse gas have a much greater impact than newer molecules.
This effect is illustrated in the figure below. The addition of 10 ppm of carbon dioxide has the greatest effect on energy absorption. The 100 and 1000 ppm graphs show a much smaller increase in energy absorption, this comes from the ‘bite’ getting wider. The wider bite is a result of carbon dioxide absorbing energy at more roughly equal wavelengths.
Water Vapour as a Greenhouse Gas. Most the planet’s greenhouse effect can be attributed to water vapour (~60% of the warming effect); it is a potent greenhouse gas which is available in vast quantities. Whilst this may sound concerning at first, it is not as bad as you may think.
Water vapor does not control the Earth’s temperature but is instead controlled by the temperature. The water holding capacity of the atmosphere is a function of temperature, for every 1 degree centigrade increase in temperature the water holding capacity of the atmosphere by increases by 6‐7%.
Therefore, if atmospheric temperature decreases then the amount of water vapour also decreases leading to a further decrease in temperature in a positive feedback loop. Whilst the same applies for any increase in temperature, it is this ability of water vapour to quickly be removed from the atmosphere which prevents any major long-term warming.
Clouds. Made from a countless number of minute water droplets which amass to create structures weighing more than 550 tons, and only lasting for approximately 4–6 hours, clouds have developed a reputation of being the crux in climate modelling. In fact, most climate models differ largely due to how they predict clouds.
Clouds can be broken down into 3 main categories. cirrus, stratus and cumulus. Cirrus: Wispy in appearance and generally form above 5 km altitude. Stratus: Horizontal sheet-like clouds which can be found from sea level to above 5000 m. Cumulus: Puffy, towering clouds which can generally be found from below 2000 m.
Cloud Formation. Clouds form when water vapour rises through the atmosphere and adiabatically cools, in line with the decrease in atmospheric temperature. Adiabatic cooling is the process whereby a substance reduces in temperature when moving from an area of high to low pressure.
For example, the cold feeling when spraying deodorant on your skin. The atmosphere decreases dramatically in pressure with altitude resulting a decrease in temperature for the water vapour.
At a certain altitude the water vapour cools to a point where it transitions phase from a gas to a liquid, creating tiny droplets of water which make up clouds. The temperature at which this occurs is called the dew point and changes based on atmospheric pressure and humidity.
Keeping Clouds Afloat. The transition of water vapour to a solid or liquid which makes up the cloud releases a large amount of energy. This energy warms the surrounding atmosphere creating turbulent air. This turbulent air is what keeps the cloud afloat.
Effect on the Climate. Different types of clouds have various impacts on how much energy they trap or reflect from the Sun. Cirrus clouds have a large infrared radiation absorption rate because they allow visible radiation to pass almost unhindered while at the same time absorbing and reradiating infrared radiation from the surface below.
Stratus and cumulus clouds have a low infrared radiation absorption rate because they do not allow as much visible radiation to pass through, instead scattering it back into space resulting in less reradiating infrared radiation to absorb from the surface below.
Aerosols are tiny particles of matter which float in the atmosphere (almost exclusively in the troposphere.) They play an important role in Earth’s climate. One common aerosol is sulfuric acid which is a product of volcanic eruptions or the burning of coal.
Most aerosols are brighter than land or ocean and cool the Earth by reflecting sunlight back to space. In short, they increase the overall albedo of the planet. Albedo is a measure of how reflective something is to solar radiation, 0 being totally absorbent and 1 being completely reflective.
Direct effects: This is when the aerosol scatters solar radiation on their own. Indirect effect: This is where the aerosols act as cloud condensation nuclei, as water coagulates around the aerosols to create lots of small water droplets which in turn, amass to create clouds.
Or, so says the Many-Worlds Interpretation of quantum physics. The modern idea of the Many-Worlds Interpretation of quantum physics has been in the news recently, mostly due to a new popular book on the topic, Something Deeply Hidden by Sean Carroll. These ideas can be traced back to a 1957 Ph.D. thesis by Hugh Everett III entitled On the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics.
However, it was mostly ignored until 1970 when Bryce DeWitt resurrected it in an article Quantum Mechanics and Reality appearing in Physics Today. Since then, a growing number of physicists have subscribed to these ideas, many referring to themselves as Everettians.
Most popularizations of the Many-Worlds Interpretation focus on the metaphors of a universe which “branches” into “parallel” worlds. This leads to all sorts of confusion.
Not only can you waste your money on a Universe Splitter app (which definitely doesn’t split anything), but physicists even argue amongst themselves at the level of these metaphors. Let’s call this kind of stuff Metaphorical Many-Worlds and not discuss it further.
Is there a better way to think about the Many-Worlds Interpretation than this? Yes — and the first thing we are going to do is stop calling it that. Everett’s core idea was the universal wave function. So what is that?
A wave function is a mathematical variable (like “x” from algebra class, but more complicated) that is used to calculate what will be observed in experiments. It’s not hard to imagine that states can change, and the point of physics is to predict how. But here’s the rub.
It is usually written with the Greek letter fi. Another name for it is quantum state. State means exactly that — all the information needed to predict what will happen, summarized in the most succinct way possible.
There are two rules in quantum mechanics for how states change, and when to apply them is arbitrary and at the discretion of the user of the theory. This bothers all physicists to some extent but bothered Everett the most.
Everett’s executive summary is this: you can do away with Process 1 by considering the quantum state of the entire universe — the universal wave function. This wave function evolves according to Schrodinger’s equation always and forever.
This is where all Everettians start. Carroll calls it “Austere Quantum Mechanics” for its beauty and simplicity. One state, one equation — all’s right with the world.
There’s also just one problem — it doesn’t fit at all with our experience of reality. We don’t experience the world as quantum things — being in superposition and entangled and whatnot — we experience a definite classical world. We really do experience Process 1. That’s why it’s there, after all.
It is at this point where most discussions go off the rails. There is Austere Quantum Mechanics and there is Metaphorical Many-Worlds. No one but Everett talks about Austere Quantum Mechanics beyond this point.
As promised, I won’t repeat anything more about Metaphorical Many-Worlds — you can find that in any popular science article on the topic. So, how should you think about Austere Quantum Mechanics without falling prey to the allure of Metaphorical Many-Worlds? Everett used a clever argument to illustrate his point, but we need to understand what superposition is to follow it.
Superposition is easily illustrated by waves. In the image below, the red wave is obtained by adding all the blue waves together. The red wave is a superposition of blue waves. There are several ways to think about this. First, if all you have is blue waves, then you can make the red wave by making all the blues ways at the same time.
On the other hand, perhaps there really are no blue waves — maybe there is only the red wave. Well, you are always free to think about the red wave as if it were made of blue waves. Now imagine each blue wave is a wave function that contains all possible states of the universe including the memory states of observers and the correlations they have with other perceived events.
For example, the first blue wave could be, a coin was flipped and landed heads and an observer’s memory state records the same. The second blue wave could be the opposite. In classical physics, adding together states of the universe has no meaning. But, in quantum physics, the superposition of the two wave functions is also a valid state of the universe.
This is roughly how Everett presented things. He imagined all the possibilities and assigned a wave function to each. Then he added them all up to arrive at the wave function of the universe. Everett’s was the bottom-up approach. It’s liable to cause confusion because it usually starts with one observer and one event.
This is too personal and what usually leads to confusion such as the idea that the observer could “split” the universe into two wave functions then and there. Let’s avoid that by considering the top-down approach. Indeed, those Everettians that claim the Many-Worlds Interpretation is the most parsimonious one should prefer this approach.
Consider the often unstated assumption that comes before Process 1 and Process 2. Now, take the system to be the entire universe. So, it has a wave function. And that’s it — we’re done. How’s that for austerity! Process 1 is already not needed if you follow Everett. But also Process 2 is not needed because ψ contains within it the entire history of possible states.
In this view, we start and end with the red wave. That’s all there is. It can be considered a superposition of all non-interacting possibilities, and hence contains observers that perceive events happening.
And if there is a universal wave function, and if it is the one true objective reality, then you are more fictitious than not — a beautiful, if not wholly imaginary blimp in an arbitrary decomposition of a static, infinitely austere mathematical reality.
A more poetic analogy might have been to decompose the red wave as many blue waves which include melodies and symphonies. Superimposing all your favorite songs would sound like horrible noise, but that noise would contain music within it.
All sounds contain a Beethoven symphony. The question is, is that a useful way to think about it? For me, the answer is no. The universal wave function serves the purpose of god.
It is a simple fiction that is at once easy to comprehend but contains as much complexity as needed when the mood strikes. That is not parsimonious — it is irrelevant. If you disagree, the complaints department is in a parallel universe.
Standing under the flickering Jesus Saves sign of the mission with an identity crisis — bingo parlor for Golden Girls-wannabes by day and rent-by-the-ten-minutes shadowed halls by night — I watched my client chat with her associates.
Made no difference to me how people earned their money — it’s all green. As long as she paid, I’d watch her eat a bowl of Wheaties flavored with week-old jizz. Jumpin’ Jack scurried by, digging into his arms like they were lotto tickets. Almost felt sorry for the guy. Almost tossed him the fiver in my bra — almost.
Been saving that for gas. He’d find some poor guy, lost and looking for directions. Probably end up being a client sooner or later. Silent Marie waved me over. “You have my money, or what? I don’t work for free, you know.”
“Yeah, yeah. You might not have a dick, but ya sure think like ya do.” She shoved a wad of notes into my hand. As glad as I was to have my money, I couldn’t shake the need to get tested in the morning. “Jessie’s gone. You’ve got to do something.”
“What does she have to do with me? Rick was picked up this morning and set for castration next week. That’s what you hired me for, wasn’t it?” Daughter? From her leopard-skin thigh-high boots to bleach-bottle-blond hair, Silent Marie didn’t look a day over twenty. “Who’s your surgeon?”
Her face paled in the flashing red and white lights as she stepped closer and fiddled with my shirt’s buttons. My skin prickled as her hot breath warmed my earlobe. “She’s only twelve. She’s…” Her hands shook as she grabbed my arm. “My daughter and they have her.”
Silent Marie laughed. “The best night surgeon money can buy. You have to help my daughter. Please.” Sighing, I stared at the blood-stained cracked stones beneath my biker’s boots. No. No should be my answer, but there’s a kid. How can I say no to helping a kid? “Who has her?”
The sidewalk spun out of control. I gripped Silent Marie and gaped. “Daydream? What would she want with your kid?” Tears filled her eyes and overflowed in the span of a breath. Yeah, that had been a stupid question. It all made sense now, though. Get the competing pimp out of the way, and she’d always be safe with Mom.
I would probably be too late, but I couldn’t tell her that. Her mind had probably played that scenario a hundred times already, anyway. I nodded and turned but turned back and tucked her money down her blouse. “Pay me when I bring your daughter back.”
Turning my bike’s headlight off, I coasted up to the large stone wall surrounding Daydream’s mansion. The scent of roses and chlorine wafted on the breeze. Memories of caressing her breasts and running my hands through her long, blond hair poolside teased my soul.
I stashed my bike in the undergrowth, leaving the key in the ignition, and headed for the not-so-secret door that would lead me to her bedchamber. Nothing had changed since the last time I had been in the tunnel. I even chuckled as I spotted my lost hair scarf — not that I have much use for one now; bald is beautiful.
Daydream was the reason I got into my line of work; in fact, the last time I was in the tunnel was the day I changed sides and never looked back. Until now. Being close enough to smell her lingering perfume sent my brain into a tailspin of questioning every decision I had made in the past ten years. God, it’s been ten years. That kid was only two years old when…
“I won’t! You can’t make me!” A high-pitched wail echoed through the tunnel, catching my breath and sending my pulse into a frenzy. “Leave me alone!” Running through the tunnel, I draw my gun and kick the door separating the tunnel from Daydream’s bedroom.
“Back off the kid!” I screamed, sidestepping a falling tapestry. Three gunshots and three dead or dying bodyguards littered the floor. Just as expected, Daydream laid on her bed, grinning worse than that damn cat. “You’re not going to get her.”
“What makes you think I want a scrawny guttersnipe?” She sneered and stood, the ivory sheet sliding down her naked curves with tantalizing perfection. I cleared my throat and grabbed the kid by her scruff, pushing her behind me. Daydream’s hair cascaded over her shoulder, and she smiled at me.
I couldn’t look away. Everything we had, everything she was — a conflicted whirlpool raged deep inside. It wasn’t until my side exploded with blinding agony that I processed what she had said. “Then why?” Falling to my knees, I pulled out the knife and stared at the kid.
Daydream knelt beside me, placing my head on her warm thighs. A million thoughts raced through my mind — and none showed me a way out. Drawing a deep breath, I struggled to my feet, blood pouring between my fingers.
I blinked my tears away and gazed at Daydream. “She got me good. One last embrace?” “I didn’t mean for… I could….” Daydream paled, and wrinkles formed across her face, turning her into a wrinkled old crone. She pulled me into her arms and — I fired two rounds into her chest. Even in death, that woman was my angel in hell.
This happened at a resort, south of Saint Marc in Haiti, two months after Baby Doc Duvalier left the country for good. One morning, the Haitian staff went on strike, locking up the food and water. They wanted an increase in pay, despite making more than professors in Port-au-Prince.
Guests were asked to stay in their rooms until the army arrived, the army being Tonton Macoute. Nothing much came of it. By that evening, the guests were back eating dinner in the outdoor dining area. Seated at a table of eight were two sisters, one twenty-four, pretty, tanned, long blonde hair, the other eighteen, also pretty, brown hair. They both wore linen dresses with bathing suits underneath.
It concerned a recent news report involving a Chilean protestor who was set on fire by the police. As the evening progressed, the sisters started arguing with two Chileans sitting across from them.
“You shouldn’t believe everything you read,” the younger Chilean was saying, lighting a cigar. His black hair shone in the candlelight and he had very white teeth. The other Chilean gazed off as if none of it mattered. “Are you telling me you don’t torture people?” the older sister asked. Her name was Erin and her younger sister was Zoey. They were Mormons from Illinois. Erin had brought Zoey down to Haiti as a birthday present.
“Come on, Zoey,” Erin said. “We’re leaving.” Sitting next them was man who’d arrived after the others. He was in his late thirties, face red from too much sun. Erin didn’t know his name. The guests were seated without introductions. Erin was worried the Chileans might follow her and Zoey, so she decided to be bold. “Will you escort us to our room?” she asked the man.
“If you like,” he said. “Let me finish my coffee.” “Don’t go” the younger Chilean said to Erin. “Let’s all have a brandy. We’re here on vacation. Don’t be angry with us.” “I don’t want a brandy,” Erin said. “C’mon, Zoey, we’re leaving.” The tourists gathered, but the Haitians were too aggressive. The guards finally had to push them back to their boats.
Zoey picked up her straw bag and a scarf she’d bought from one of the locals. Haitians were allowed on the beach once a week to sell crafts. The tourists gathered, but the Haitians were too aggressive. The guards finally had to push them back to their boats. The following morning, everything — including food and water — was locked up. The staff went and sat under some palms.
As soon as the man finished his coffee, he stood up, too. “She was an agitator.” “You burned her.” “How can I convince her?” he asked the man. “You’re educated. Surely you have an opinion.” “Leave me out of this,” the man said. “It’s too complicated.”
“But it’s not complicated,” the younger Chilean said. “The girl had a Molotov cocktail up her sleeve. It exploded when she fell. The police and military have been exonerated. This is well documented.” “We don’t have anything to do with prisoners,” the older Chilean said. “Why was she a prisoner?” Erin asked. “It was a peaceful protest.”
“Peaceful protest?” the younger Chilean said. “She had a bomb.” “Be careful,” the younger Chilean said to him. “That one bites.” Erin shook her head and took the man’s arm. “Be careful,” the younger Chilean said to him. “That one bites.”
The man followed Erin and Zoey down the patio steps to the beach. The Chileans had been there earlier, playing chess and talking to women. When they sat down for dinner, they had been polite and courteous. They said they were on their way to a conference in Mexico. Then Erin asked why farmers and trade unionists were set on fire. “Set on fire?” the younger Chilean said. “Nobody was set on fire. You think we’re animals?”
Walking along the beach now, Zoey kept looking back. Her hand was looped through the man’s arm. Erin did the same with his other arm. “They had mean eyes,” Zoey said. “You didn’t think so yesterday,” Erin said. “I wasn’t the one who thought they were handsome.”
They’d been at the nude beach the previous afternoon. The Chileans were coming onto women. They offered Erin and Zoey a drink. Erin thought the younger one called himself Marco. “Why didn’t anybody else say anything back there?” Erin asked the man. “You seemed to be handling yourself okay,” he said. “Nobody even introduced themselves,” she said. “You notice that? I don’t even know your name. I’m Erin, by the way, and this is Zoey.”
“Scott,” he said. “What do you do, Scott?” “I’m work for an advertising agency in Montreal.” Erin stopped and looked at him. “Then you must have heard about that Chilean girl.” “Of course I heard about it.” “They’re agricultural attachés,” he replied. “That’s not exactly Pinochet’s death squad. They probably weren’t even in the country.” “Then why didn’t you say anything?” “They’re agricultural attachés,” he replied. “Not exactly Pinochet’s death squad.” Zoey kept looking back over her shoulder.
“They’re not following us, Zoey,” Erin said, gathering up the bottom of her linen dress and walking into the water. She started twirling around. “Let’s stop talking about those stupid Chileans. We’re on vacation. We should be having fun.” She pulled off her dress, showing a light blue bikini. Then she ran further into the water.
“Come on, you, two.” She waded into deeper water , taking off her bikini and throwing it up on the sand. Scott shrugged, took off his shirt and pants, and joined her. Zoey sat cross-legged on the sand. She kept looking back at the dining pavilion.
Erin and Scott went further out. She put her arms around his neck. “Tell me if Zoey’s watching,” she said. “I’ll kiss you if she’s not. What’s she doing?” “She’s just sitting there,” he said. They kissed, then Erin looked back, seeing shadows moved in the palms behind the beach chairs. She thought she saw fireflies, too.
They walked down the bougainvillea path, following the lights to an open-air building next to a long wharf. People danced on the parquet floor while others sat at a long tiki bar. Erin wanted Scott to dance with her. He wanted a drink first and stood at the bar with some people he knew. Zoey sat cross-legged in one of the rattan chairs.
“I’m not going,” Zoey said.Erin was a bit tipsy. She twirled around until Marco had to catch her. “Come with us, Zoey,” he said. “It won’t be fun without you. We’ll rumba.” He put one hand on his chest and did a few steps. “Please,” he said. “We’re all good friends now, aren’t we? Eduardo needs a partner.”
Zoey went in the room, washed her face, then got into bed. She heard Erin laughing in the hall. When she woke up later, it was quiet. Erin wasn’t in her bed. Zoey got up and opened the door. Nobody was outside. She went downstairs, walked around the pool, then came back and waited by the window. Shadows appeared along the path. A few minutes later, Erin came in the room. She was still drunk.
he went in the washroom and started crying. Zoey listened at the washroom door. “Erin?” she said. Erin didn’t answer. “Are you okay?” Zoey asked. “No,” Erin said. “Go to sleep, Zoey. I don’t want to talk.” Zoey stared out the window at the moon, imagining it was one of those all-seeing eyes.
Zoey went back to bed, then Erin came and got into the bed next to her. She cried some more. Zoey felt like crying, too. It seemed like there was a lot to cry about. She looked at the stars outside the window. They looked like the glow from cigarettes the guards were smoking earlier. They also looked like damning eyes. That made her feel like crying, too.
Lisa inserted the blank cassette into the boombox. She tuned the radio dial to 106.5 FM and waited, finger poised over the record button. “Uptown girl,” sang Billy Joel. “You’ve been living in an uptown world.” Lisa snorted. If she was an uptown girl she wouldn’t be trying to make a mixtape using the cheapest boombox sold by Radio Shack and hoping for the perfect songs to be played on the radio.
Lisa paged idly through the latest Seventeen Magazine with her spare hand. Maybe she should get a perm? She was tired of fussing for an hour every morning with her curling iron and Aquanet just to have it all go flat by the end of third period.
On the other hand, she had already blown two months' worth of babysitting money on the boombox so how could she afford a perm? Lisa waited for the final strains of “Uptown Girl” to die down. She pushed the record button just in case as the next song began to play. “Burning Down the House.” No, that wasn’t the vibe she was going for at all. She pressed stop and then rewind. At least it was easy at this stage of the process when she could just go back to the beginning.
Lisa picked up a pencil and started marking answers in the What Kind of Girlfriend Are You? quiz. A nonexistent one, she thought. Still, it was good to be prepared. She could figure out what kind of girlfriend she wanted to be if this mixtape worked out. The Talking Heads faded out and Lionel Ritchie faded in. No, still not right. It was beginning to feel like this project would take all night long like the lyrics of the current song.
She just needed a few perfect songs to tell David how she felt. If only the DJ would start playing the right music, something that captured the overwhelming itching inside whenever she looked at his light brown hair curling gently around his ears.
It was all she could do in history class not to lean forward and kiss the back of his neck. No, she was going to wait until the end of class and then tap him on the shoulder and hand over the cassette. “I taped some songs I thought you would like,” she would say. He would be confused at first but once he got home and listened to the tape he would start to realize that she loved him and then as the songs continued to play he would suddenly understand he loved her too.
Maybe he would make his own mixtape and when she sat down behind him in class he would turn around and smile at her with those incredible dimples and hand her a tape. “I made you one too,” he’d say. “I hope you like it.” Perfect! Lisa hovered her finger over the record button ready to push it down as soon as the first notes of the haunting riff began. What better song could there be to let David know how important he was to her?
Ooogbrilgry3X7 sighed in contentment when Lisa pushed down the button and the first haunting riffs of the song began to play. He had no idea what she had been waiting for with her finger poised at the ready as each song faded and a new one began but he was glad she had finally found it.
Lisa was Ooog’s first assignment after a somewhat lackluster trajectory at the academy. “Don’t screw this up,” his progenitor had hissed into his hearing receptacle just before Ooog boarded the ship. “I’m running out of favors to call in and save your sorry flesh.”
How could it possibly go wrong? Ooog wondered. He was the smallest of cogs in a large machine. The brief was simple. For 50 days Ooog and his fellow young recruits would each be linked to a random earthling. They would feel all sensory data with their subject in real-time — sight, sound, touch, smell, taste.
“Notice everything,” Supervisor Uuuxingtrix8B2 had instructed. “All your physical needs will be supplied by your pods so you have nothing to distract you from your task. You will not be able to read the thoughts of your subject but you will get a general sense of their emotional state, particularly if those emotions are strong. Don’t allow this to distract you from your important task.
“At the end of the monitoring period, you will be extensively debriefed by the generals and the data you collect along with your overall thoughts and impressions will be invaluable as we form our attack and colonization plans.”
Ooog was surprised by how much he enjoyed his work. Experiencing life through Lisa’s senses was a constant mystery. Why? he found himself asking himself a million times a day. Why do this and not that? What is the purpose of these activities?
There was plenty of time for daydreaming and crafting elaborate theories in his head, a skill Ooog had been unintentionally nurturing his entire life but which had always gotten him in trouble in the past. I can’t believe I’m getting paid for this, Ooog thought.
You would think complete sensory input would be enough but Ooog found himself wanting more. What are you thinking? rolled through his mind over and over. The longer Ooog monitored Lisa the more questions he had and the more he cared about the answers. Her emotions started to blend into his emotions. Her happiness in life became one of his primary desires even as he had no ability to affect her in any way.
Ooog hadn’t the slightest idea why Lisa was spending hours listening to the radio and choosing only a few songs to record but he was filled with satisfaction every time she pushed the button. Lisa slipped her feet into her baby blue Minnetonka moccasins, slung her backpack over her shoulder, and rushed out the door to Melissa’s waiting green Gremlin. Thank god at least one of her friends had a car and was willing to give her a ride to school so she didn’t have to take the bus.
“What mixtape?” Melissa asked, slipping the Gremlin into reverse and backing out of the driveway. Lisa flipped down the visor with its little mirror and started applying eyeshadow the exact shade of her shoes while she explained her brilliant mixtape seduction plan. “Do you think it will work?” Melissa asked, wincing as she hit a pothole.
“Totally! Seventeen magazine says sometimes you need to find a creative way to tell him how you feel,” Lisa replied, licking her finger and rubbing off the smudge of blue trailing up her forehead after that last bump. I really need to start getting up early enough to do my makeup before the ride to school, she thought.
562,345,879 miles away in the asteroid belt, Ooog metaphorically slapped his head in surprise. He couldn’t do it literally having neither hands nor a head strictly speaking. Besides which, being immobilized by the monitoring pod, he was currently unable to control any portion of the body parts he did possess.
Still, had he been human, Ooog decided, he would be slapping his head right now. Last night’s activity had been about crafting a message to a potential procreation partner? None of his guesses had even been close. Ooog marveled anew at this fascinating creature he had the fortune to be monitoring. She really was something quite special. It was too bad there was no way he could send her a message to explain his growing feelings.
“What songs did you choose?” Melissa asked, pulling up at the yellow light behind a little red Corvette. “Okay, so like my only options were what they actually played on the radio last night so whatever, but still, I totally think I got a good mix.” Lisa pulled the tape out of her backpack to look at the song titles she had carefully written down on the liner notes.
“First is ‘Every Breath You Take’, cause, like, I’ve been watching him forever and I care about him so much. “Next, ‘Total Eclipse of the Heart’, cause, you know, it’s like he’s so awesome my desire for him blots out everything else.
“‘Is There Something I Should Know,’ like I already said. I mean, ‘please, please tell me now’ is totally what I want to say to him. I wish I could’ve put this one last but whatever. “‘Let’s Dance’, cause obviously.” Lisa sighed imagining herself swaying in David’s arms. “‘Love Lift Us Up,’ cause we belong together on the mountain top.
“‘How am I Supposed to Live Without You,’ cause I need David to know that I’ll just die without him.” Lisa slammed the visor up and put her mascara away just as Melissa pulled into the school parking lot. I sure hope that boy knows how lucky he is, Ooog thought, feeling the bumps of bodies against Lisa as she joined the scrum racing for the front door before the tardy bell rang. If he ends up hurting her… Ooog’s thoughts trailed off.
If he hurts her you’ll do what Ooog? he rather sensibly asked himself. What could you possibly do? You have no ability to influence events. You don’t even have a way to tell her how you feel. The halls of J.F.K. High School abruptly disappeared as Ooog's sensory input switched to his own body for the first time in almost two earth months.
“Congrats, Ooogbrilgry3X7,” said Technician Aaaryptim1Y9 looking down at her clipboard to be sure she had the right name. “Your monitoring time is complete. Enjoy the rest of the day off as your body adjusts to renewed activity. Debriefing will begin tomorrow.”
Ooog lay in the open pod stunned as the various tubes and sensors retracted from his body. This was it? His time with Lisa was over? Ooog wandered through the ship in a haze feeling like a foreigner in his own flesh. “Praise the divine deities above,” Iiimngrat3N2 said, shoveling food into his orifice as fast as his four main tentacles could manage. “If I had had to taste one more slice of pizza I would have exploded. Isn’t it great to be back?”
Ooog nodded mindlessly at his old friend Iiim. He pushed the food around his plate barely noticing it. Lisa should be in third period by now. Would she give the mixtape to David? How would he react? Frustration rolled over Ooog as he realized he would never know.
“Can’t say I’m looking forward to the debrief,” Iiim muttered one wriggling delicacy managing to escape out of the corner of his mouth as he chewed and spoke at the same time. “But I sure am looking forward to the attack. The planet’s not too bad, but the people? Can’t wait to see them all subjugated.” Ooog looked at Iiim in alarm. He had been so wrapped up in the joy of monitoring Lisa and the devastation of the loss of access to her life, he had completely lost focus on the end goal of their mission.
“Sorry,” Ooog said, pushing away from the table. “I’m still a bit woozy. I’m going to go lie down.” Tell me how am I supposed to live without you? Now that I’ve been lovin’ you so long How am I supposed to live without you? And how am I supposed to carry on? When all that I’ve been livin’ for is gone
Lisa Branigan’s voice echoed in Ooog’s memory. The worst part was his Lisa would never know how he felt. If only there was some way to communicate with her. If only he could get a message through. At least David was going to get a mixtape. Wait! That’s it! Ooog bolted from his bed and rushed to the door.
Six hours later Ooog was ready. The technical bit was surprisingly easy. Ooog sent a fax down to the station making it look like a request from KWOD’s biggest sponsor. He promised a ridiculous amount of money if they would play his songs exactly as requested during the evening time slot. He also threatened to drop sponsorship completely if they refused, so Ooog was pretty confident his songs would hit the air. Lisa always listened to KWOD while doing homework in the evening.
The plan was solid and came together in minutes. Choosing the perfect songs was the hard part. How do you say everything you will ever be able to say to someone using only the music of an alien species? It’s a good thing Ooog had a deadline or he would have been perfecting his playlist in perpetuity. Lisa stretched out on her bed, homework abandoned at her side. Had he listened to the tape yet? What did he think? How could she have been so stupid? She turned on the radio hoping to take her mind off of her fears.
“This is DJ Fred the Ned coming to you live from KWOD in Sacramento. We’ve got something a little special for you tonight. For the next hour, I’m going to be paying you some tunes especially dedicated to a lovely lady named Lisa. Lisa, if you are out there listening tonight, someone went to a whole lot of trouble and expense to send you these songs.”
Lisa jolted up in shock. Could it be? Was David seeing her mixtape and raising her an on-air declaration of love through song? This was so much better than anything she ever could have imagined. “First up we have ‘Separate Ways’ from Journey” came the dulcet tones of DJ Fred while Lisa tried to calm her rapidly beating heart.
I won’t let it slide, David, Lisa thought. I’ll hold on to every chance. I’m coming to you. Don’t worry. I’m coming to you. I’m so happy you feel the same way about me as I do about you. We are going to have an entire lifetime to put our arms around each other.
I’m coming for you Lisa, Ooog tried to say with this song. I don’t know how I’ll get to you, but somehow, when the invasion happens, I’ll fight my way to you. Just keep yourself alive and you will be able to live with me forever as my pet. It will be awesome.
The window is open to the night air. The cool, almost cold of this equatorial night flows in across the floor and touches my lower back as I type. The power comes on in about an hour, and with that, the wifi. It doesn’t come out as far as my room so in order to be able to work online, I have to walk through the dark to the tables where I can plug in.
I will pick up all my electronics, make my way down the gravel path to the kitchen. I will still be outside, as there is nowhere to work in the building. Whatever animals are in the area, whatever hyenas or lions or gazelles or porcupines happen to be meandering through, I am sharing the air with them.
They don’t scare me. Respect is different from fear. Learning how to give space to creatures of the night, to make room for those whose world this was long before me, is part of being in the symphony.
As a child of the woods, I grew up with night sounds. Granted, what the Florida nights offered me was not the near-distant sounds of a lion’s roar, the hyena’s howl or the great, slow rustling of elephant feet accompanied by breaking branches.
Still it was a symphony of wind, frogs singing by the tens of thousands and the almost-spooky whippoorwill and chuck-will’s-widows as the swooped to catch insects. Those sounds are silenced now. The trees and deep woods which housed the creatures of the night are covered with concrete.
Windows which once allowed the dense scent of gardenias to waft over my four-year-old-face the same way that the night air touches my skin are shut to the night air, all sounds and scents walled off for a sterile environment.
Safe. Or so we think. From that big bad world out there. I am now at the tables at The Stables, which is what these accommodations are called. It’s nearly impossible to photograph the light that I am seeing right now.
When there is a low cloud cover, as with right now, the rising sun paints everything a strange pinkish-yellow unlike any other place I’ve ever been. The light reminds me of those brief, shimmering moments when in Colorado or out on the ocean, a bank of clouds cants the sunlight in such a way that the light touches everything: trees, water, creatures, with an off-worldly glow.
You have to be outside, you have to present, to see the light. That’s also part of the symphony. In The Great Animal Orchestra,Finding the Original Music of the World’s Wild Places, author Bernie Krause speaks to what once was and what we are losing far too fast.
Far too many of us, especially those much younger whose eardrums are being blasted to smithereens by too-loud music from their devices, have no idea what the world truly sounds like. Nor do they feel the slightest bit at ease when they do hear the world in all its swiftly-diminishing glory.
As the sun comes up, the “go away” bird (clearly a cousin of our jays) and a host of other wildlife chirp up. The local starlings, an iridescent, cheeky bird of great beauty, hops onto the table to steal any bit of food not covered. So too the chattering, eager and unbelievably swift Vervet monkies whose ear-pounding run across the tin roof sounds like an attacking hoard, and whose lightning-fast reflexes can relieve you of an apple or treat before you can blink.
Such noises are combined with the clink of spoons stirring coffee, low conversations and mumbles of Jambo (Swahili greeting) among those stumbling into the early morning.For our part of the symphony has all too often been full of blood and guns and destruction and devastation, bombs and fires and destruction all fueled by greed, ignorance, hate and misplaced desires.
We destroy what we dominate. We dominate what we fear. These days we fear just about everything, most especially each other. At least in that regard, there’s damned good reason to be wary. One girl who has been at The Stables is terrified of insects. The loss of insect populations, because they are “inconvenient,” has wiped out billions of birds and more species every year.
She sprays her room full of insecticide, and hates snakes, hates spiders. And she has this belief that she understands conservation. Conservation isn’t a convenience. It’s a way of life. We accommodate Nature, not the other way around.
This great, vast place of Ol Pejeta is barely a blip, a tiny dot on the continent of Africa. At least here, when I open my window at night (and invite in all manner of curious creatures most of whom will toss my trash can, and did) I feel the breeze on my face, full of spices and the distant smells of elephant feces and the cries of animals on the hunt and those being hunted.
Krause explains that each and every sound made in nature is part of how those creatures communicate. They can sense predators, mating partners, the sound of joy, announcements of danger such as the red-billed oxpecker, whose cry tells a giraffe or rhino a predator lurks nearby.
Including us. We are the worst. For as better writers than I have long been pointing out, we kill for sport and fun and pure meanness. When I return to places like the Amazon, the deep forests of Croatia, the wild, immensely lonely open spaces of Iceland, I hear what is left of the symphony.
What we are doing is removing instruments, here a clarinet, there a bass drum, here the first violin, there the French horn, until there are only a few players remaining. The reference points of those creatures are gone. Some, far too many, forever.
It is the diversity of that music which makes it so breathtaking. Silence, such as the silence along the Ring Road of Iceland, has its own stunning beauty. Today, most of us can’t even bear silence for fifteen minutes. Instead, we impose our offensive boombox speakers on other people’s eardrums as we hike, we bring our overbearing, bullying loudness into the quiet spaces of the world where there is less music to hear.
If I want to hear crickets at night, in too many places I have to buy a sound machine. We destroy what we fear. The world’s sharks are disappearing into trophies or fin soup. I have swum with Great Whites off the coast of Gansbaai. These are beautiful, magnificent animals, to be respected, not feared.
They are part of the ocean’s symphony. Yet due to ignorance, greed and fear, we are wiping out a keystone species in the world’s waters. We are the travesty, not all of us, but too many. We are disappearing the earth’s greatest songs, the music we were given to enjoy, celebrate, bask in.
We were given dominion, which to my mind means stewardship. That wasn’t wholesale permission to pick off the artists one by one like a shooting gallery, which in this case is an apt description.
This is why I travel. This is why I come to Ol Pejeta. This is why I want you to consider either coming here or supporting their work. For because of these great places, you can still be awakened in the early hours by the roars of mating lions, the sound of chattering monkeys, the pounding of rhino hooves and the crash of an elephant through the brush, her tiny baby right behind.
The more you explore the less you fear. The more you experience, the more you hear. And the more you hear of the true Earth’s music, the more determined you will be to protect who is left to sing for us, and to bring back some we have almost lost.
While we were dealing with 2020, few of us in North Jersey noticed the nearly complete lack of acorns, but you can be sure the chipmunks and squirrels noticed it! But now this year you may be noticing something different — the lack of chipmunks and squirrels. What you’re observing is part of a natural cycle that follows an amazing event known as Oak Tree Masting.
Ecologist Dr. Dustin Partridge explains that it’s the aftermath of “Oak Tree Masting.” We both live in Kinnelon, New Jersey, USA which is located an hour’s drive from New York City, nestled in the heart of “The Highlands,” a wooded hilly region about halfway between New York City and Pennsylvania.
“Masting happens every few years when all the trees signal to produce extra acorns/oak nuts, as a reproductive strategy. Basically, if they produce tons of seeds they ensure that the local wildlife will be full before they’re able to eat all the seeds produced. It’s a way to make sure a few of the tree’s offspring survive,” said Dr. Partridge.
Whoa. Time out. Oak Trees are talking to each other? The Tree of Souls is a giant willow-like tree within James Cameron’s Avatar whose roots are capable of initiating neural links with species living on the fictional planet of Pandora. That sounds crazy. But really, it’s not too far from reality!
If Oak Trees know when the next masting year is, they are not saying. It’s not on a predetermined schedule as with Periodical Cicadas and their 13 or 17 year breeding cycles (prime numbers for what it’s worth). So unlike the confidently predicted arrival of Brood X currently underway, the next Oak Tree Masting is a closely guarded secret, apparently known only to the Oaks.
How they decide and how they agree on it is still largely a mystery. Their root systems might pass signals to each other with the aid of fungal structures called Mycelia.
But Oak Tree populations bifurcated by large river systems still sync with each other. So weather patterns might also play a role in their collective decision on when to drop a mass quantity of acorns on my driveway. I mean the forest floor.
Regardless, the casual observer is left marveling at the interconnected nature of our natural world and how much we have yet to learn about it. Faced with this abundance of food, Our local Eastern Gray Squirrels and Eastern Chipmunks produce more offspring during an Oak Masting year and in the following spring.
This is what we witnessed here in spring 2020 while working from home and looking out the window at our backyards. Acorns emerge in the late summer and early fall as a perfect winter food for squirrels and chipmunks to stow away just as the weather starts to turn cold and the other food sources are depleted.
They are high in protein and come individually wrapped and preserved in their own recyclable single serving container. Squirrels and Chipmunks are especially fond of them.
Sothe spring after a mast year usually begins with an abundance of squirrels and chipmunks, but this time it began also with many of us working from home, starting our first vegetable gardens just to see them overrun by hungry furballs.
Dr. Partridge himself laments that he was “left without a single tomato or peach,” in reference to the abundance of acorn eating rodents. Rodent Population Response to Oak Nut Masting. Graphic by Dustin Patridge, Ph.D.
To make matters worse, Oak Trees produce far fewer if any acorns in the year following a Mast Year. So as other food supplies dwindle and at about the time when acorns would normally be falling and right as Squirrels and Chipmunks likely have exhausted much of the non-acorn food supply, there are almost none to be eaten or stowed.
I maintain a local Facebook Page with a decent local following of other wildlife enthusiasts who were observing squirrel roadkill in unusually high numbers last fall and one incredible report of swimming squirrels in a lake.
Dr. Partridge has witnessed the swimming squirrel behavior in his work and recalls a time years ago when one hungry, tired wet squirrel came and rested on the stern of his boat. This type of risky behavior increases for various reasons including a shortage of food and biological dispersal, and it is likely to increase in the year following an acorn masting.
People are noticing the absence of squirrels and chipmunks right now, because the 2019 Oak Masting caused an increase in the number of squirrels and chipmunks living around here in the spring and summer of 2020,” reasons Dr. Partridge. “It’s a perfectly natural cycle. However, I’m inclined to say everyone is noticing the lack of rodents this year because so many of us were home through much of 2020 gazing at the backyard and really noticing the local wildlife.
Most Oak Trees are planted by squirrels. You heard that right. An oak sapling has almost no chance of survival if growing in the shadow of the tree it fell from. They are designed to roll and that certainly helps. But what the Oak Tree really wants is for a squirrel to take it, bury it, and either forget it or not need it.
Most Oak Trees are planted by squirrels who buried an acorn and did not retrieve it. Some are just not needed and some are lost or forgotten. Squirrels are able to find and stash over 25 acorns in an hour. It’s all a numbers game. And a shell game. Most of the acorns are subsequently moved to thwart would-be cache raiders spying on the squirrels’ hard work.
Squirrels do not aim to retrieve all of their acorns by winter’s end for the same reasons we humans land our airplanes with fuel still in the tank. Just enough is not enough in practical terms. Nor are squirrels even able to retrieve all of their winter food stashes. One study found that Squirrels are able to find about 95% of their buried acorns in a controlled environment, while other studies put the acorn recovery rate at closer to 25%.
An Oak Masting every two to five years helps this tremendously. A single Oak Tree can produce over 10,000 acorns in a mast year. This tricks the Squirrels into hoarding more than can be consumed by the squirrels or the thieves and leaving them scattered and increasing chances that the seeds will eventually germinate near a patch of sunlight.
When a tree falls in the woods, a huge patch of sky opens up and a race begins. Maple saplings from their helicopter wing seeds are competing with saplings coming out of the roots of Beech trees and others.Oaks want their shot.
And the squirrels have given them one. The journey of a tree to the top of the forest canopy is a long and perilous competition with other saplings and flora, and all at the mercy of herbivores.
So why do oak trees do this? “To ensure their offspring survive,” explains Dr. Partridge. What’s easy to miss in a deciduous forest is the slow motion race for sunlight that begins when a patch of sky opens up, such as when a tree falls. Saplings will compete to fill that gap and oak trees want a fair shot at it.
A dead Oak Tree and a live Eastern Chipmunk. Each ring in the trunk represents a year of the Oak Tree’s life which came to an end shortly before the author discovered it lying across the road while testing the all wheel drive, breaks, independant suspension, and ice tires of his Subaru Outback one dark, snowy, windy night. Kinnelon, New Jersey, USA. Photograph by Author
It’s a cycle that’s been repeating for a very long time. Keep your eyes peeled for oak tree saplings that our Squirrels have been tricked into planting for them.
As I’m sure you will have read before, functioning alcoholics are devious bastards. They will convince you night is day. Hell, they’ll convince themselves night is day. There are no lengths they won’t go to in order to get their sweaty, shaking little mitts on that drink. I should know.
During the worst times of my drinking, I actually had relatively long periods of sobriety. I say long, I’d occasionally reach the dizzying heights of 2–3 weeks off the sauce. But by the end of the third week I’d be chomping at the bit and planning a fall out with my wife so I could get out of the family home and back to the chaos and misery.
One of the many misconceptions drunks have is that ‘this time’ the boozing session will be different. That somehow none of the behaviour exhibited last time will occur again. That it won’t mean sinking to your lowest depths.
I used to be quite resentful towards myself for managing to stay sober for a few weeks. I’d stand in the school playground waiting to collect the kids, hating all the other parents around for me for not obsessing over getting to the pub or some hotel to check in and turn a modest double room into a scene from Trainspotting.
My wife and I were on the way home from the supermarket when I’d decided I’d had enough of being a husband. The need to get several bottles of wine down my neck was quite literally suffocating me. I had to fabricate a disagreement.
“When’s your Mum coming to stay?” I said with moderate venom. “Tomorrow, for a week. I can’t wait to get her from the airport.” my wife replied. “Jesus, a whole week? Is she staying with us the whole time?” I asked. “Yes, she’s staying with us. What’s wrong with that?” “Nothing. Can’t wait.”
The foundations had been laid. A visit from the Mother-in-law was a definite argument-starter. I loathed her and I’m sure the feeling was mutual. With any luck I could disappear and come up smiling as her taxi to the airport pulls up in a week’s time. Shopping put away, I sat and surfed the internet on my laptop, bombarded with the usual ads. Seventy-nine pounds one-way on the Eurostar to Brussels?
As my wife sits opposite me, oblivious to my actions, I gently pop in my credit card details and book a seat for today, leaving at 3pm. It’s 11am now, so that gives me an hour to get into an argument worthy of a storm-out, then an hour or so to get to St. Pancras Station.
I decide against the argument and head upstairs to grab my laptop bag. I throw in a couple of chargers, a pair of socks and a pair of headphones. My passport is stored permanently in the inside pocket of the laptop bag, exactly for moments like this. I’ve lost count of the number of times my wife has confiscated my passport along with my bank cards. I head downstairs and towards the door.
“Where are you going?” asks my wife, nonchalently. “Just popping out to get a sim card for my ipad. Back in a minute.” I reply. Engrossed in her work, she barely notices me practically skip out the door and into the street, propelled by the thought of unencumbered boozing with no-one interrupting me. I walk to the pub at the end of the road and hop inside, with the excitement and hope of an 8 year old boy on Christmas morning.
“BMW, please.” I say, joyfully. “What’s a BMW?” replies the bargirl. “Brandy, Malibu and Whiskey. Surely you’ve made a BMW before?” I reply, trying not to let the girl’s lack of enthusiasm get me down. She reluctantly makes the drink as I survey the bar, looking for anyone I may need to avoid. Sure enough, one of the resident drunks approaches me.
“Alright Dan, daytime session is it?” he quips. “Haha, yea something like that.” I reply, trying to minimise interaction. I look at my phone, further discouraging any further comment. Luckily, he’s desperate to visit the toilet so he staggers away, chuckling. Sober, I would avoid this man like the plague. Drunk, I’d introduce him to my parents and let him stay over.
“Here you go.” Says the bartender, as the slams the BMW down in front of me. “That’s a proper drunk’s drink that, sure you’re not related to George Best?”
Several of the death row inmates from the other side of the bar laugh out loud. “Haha, no. I’ve been working shifts lately, I’ve not had a chance to get out much. This is my 10pm, really.” I insist politely.
This is an extremely curteous response compared to the sort of barrage of abuse she’d get from me if it were 10pm and I’d been drinking all day. “Yea all right.” she says, obviously in disbelief. I swipe my debit card to pay and thank her for my drink.
I sit and take a large slurp of perhaps the most dangerous commercially-avilable drink on planet earth. Extremely alcoholic, the Malibu and Baileys make it extremely easy to drink. The combination of all three turn it into a sort of rocket fuel to piss-heads like me. You need to limit yourself to one or two or you run the risk of falling asleep in the street
I visit the bar and order a white wine spritzer, my drink of choice when taking trips like this. I return to my seat and feign a phone call as the man returns from the toilet, making conversation impossible.
He nods at me and I return the gesture. I deftly press the button to call a taxi without breaking my flow, just in case the resident drunk notices. He doesn’t so I order my taxi.Two more spritzers in 20 minutes and I’m ready to leave.
The taxi driver is silent for the whole journey, my favourite kind. He drops me at the side entrance to St. Pancras International without comment. My phone has started to ring every few minutes so I gently enter airplane mode. This act alone triggers the beginning of today’s anxiety. I’ve always loved airports, and the Eurostar terminal is the closest you can get without actually visiting one.
I breeze through the check in and towards the security. Carrying just a backpack means I’m through and into the Eurostar lounge in seconds. As I order my drink I’m struck with the paralysing realisation that I’ve left my debit card at home. Thankfully, I have around 750 quid in cash so this calms me temporarily.
How much can a day trip to Brussels cost? Surely that’s enough to have a nights fun in Brussels, then hop back on the Eurostar tomorrow afternoon. I’ll tell the wife it was all a big misunderstanding and we’ll be best mates by bedtime.
My drinking tempo accelerates somewhat in the departure lounge, as my three weeks off the booze has heightened my sensitivity to it. I wolf down a large number of pastries and order another spritzer. Its time to board the train.
Standard class on the Eurostar is like first class on any other train. The chairs are comfy and each has seat has it’s own table. Perfect for spreading out with an ipad and a liquid picnic. Fellow travellers beware!
Alcoholics love Eurostar because of the bar. A proper, stand-up bar at the end of coach N. You can head in there, order a panini and a coffee, maybe a croque madáme, and hang out by the window and watch the world go by. I normally order several bottles of wine and as much cheese as I can stuff into my backpack. Absolutely unable to socialise I return to my seat and table, eager to settle down.
In a quiet coach with no fellow Eurostarian’s at my table, I set up my ipad and put my headphones on, cueing up a movie. I select ‘Leaving Las Vegas’. A film about a man hellbent on drinking himself to death after his wife and kids have left.
I drink pretty consistently for around an hour before I fall asleep. The British countryside races past me before we enter the tunnel itself, followed by grey and rainy French fields the other end. I sleep blissfully unaware. We arrive in Brussels. I know this because a fairly angry business type man has woken me with a shove. “We’re in Brussels mate, its probably time to get off.” “Oh thanks.” I say, slightly weary.
“Could’ve done without your loud snoring though, I get enough of that sleeping next to my wife.” “Sorry, I must’ve drifted off.” I reply, innocently. “I’m not surprised, you’ve had shitloads of wine.” he says, gesturing towards the mess on the table in front of me.
Embarassed, I get up and grab my backpack. I stuff my ipad etc into it, and clamber for the empty bottles and cheese nets. “Sorry about that.” I say, weakly. He saunters off shaking his head. The effect of so much booze in a few short hours has taken it’s toll on me. I’ve lost my boy-like enthusiasm and immediately regret taking this trip. I have started to sober up, and can now also feel my anxiety calling again.
I exit the train and wander along the platform. I stupidly switch my phone on and encounter 43 missed calls from my wife. This increases the anxiety ten-fold. I attempt to turn it off again but my sweaty hands seem incapable of switching the shitty thing off.
The phone starts to ring, and a slew of screaming messages arrive on the screen all at once. I stop to get a bottle of wine out of my bag and take a deep swig, tilting my head back to restore some sort of sanity. I stumble and narrowly miss falling head over heels and onto the train tracks.
The chaos has begun. As I approached the street exit I put my hand into my pocket for some cash. I feel nothing. With no debit card I am completely reliant on that bundle of now absent cash. I check my backpack pockets, remove the ipad and headphones and check it thoroughly.
This sobers me immediately and I feel a tsunami of fear wash over me. Gripped with anxiety and short of breath, I check my pockets again, nothing. It must have dropped out when I was asleep, or maybe someone took it? Maybe it was the suit guy?
I take a seat on a bench and attempt to compose myself. I’m sweating profusely and starting to feel the tightness in my chest. I’m up shit creek without a paddle, make no mistake.
There’s no choice, I need to find a bar where I can run up a tab whilst I try to form a plan. With no debit card I can’t even arrange for a friend to send me some money. Theres no sense in trying to find a way out of this mess sober. I need a drink.
I pull my soaked t-shirt from my clammy body and attempt a look of non-desperation as I enter a nearby bar. A young guy is manning the place the whilst busily typing away on a laptop. He notices my presence and looks at me.
“Have you got any wine?” I ask, pathetically. He laughs. “Well, this is a bar so yes, we have wine. What kind do you like?” I laugh nervously. “Ha, oh I don’t know, a Chardonnay maybe?”
“Well it is a Chardonnay or not? We have a few wines.” His jovial tone relaxes me less than one per cent. “Chardonnay it is then!” I say, attempting to sound like I’m genuinely on holiday and not some sordid alcoholic day trip from London. The effort to do this almost drains my last bit of energy.
I fantasise that he will not require immediate payment and allow me, mercifully, to settle my tab at the end of my visit, as is customary on the continent. “Shall I run you a tab?” he says. I exhale deeply. I close my eyes and lower my head, steadying my pose by gripping the bar tightly. The relief is awesome, even my teeth relax.
“You ok mate?” he asks, concerned. I open my eyes, which are now locked onto his every move, petrified he’ll change his mind about the tab. In this type of situation I could tell any number of lies about why I look like so dishevelled. I go with one I’ve not used before. “I’ve just come from my Mums funeral.” I bullshit.
“Oh mate, that’s rough. Take a seat, I’ll bring it over.” he says. His Australian accent soothing me another one per cent, as I briefly imagine all Australian’s to be drunks and somehow understanding of my stupid predicament. I sit at the table nearest the bar, not daring to leave this strangers side.
My panic attack is now a level four, compared to 9.5 when I realised I had no money just a few minutes before. He hurries around the bar and over to the table carrying the wine and a glass. No time for spritzers now, I need the sheer power of pure wine.
“Here you go mate, get that down you. You meeting someone?” he enquires. Suddenly frozen in time by the shame of ordering an entire bottle of wine in a bar without anyone to drink it with I concoct another lie. “Yea, my brother should be here a bit later. He’s still on the Eurostar.”
“He missed your Mums funeral? Jeez.” “Yea, he doesn’t like all the fuss. I filmed all the best bits on my phone though, so he’s cool.” The barman looks horrified. “Ok mate, well enjoy. I’m over here if you need me.”
And need him I definitely would. I’m miles away from home with no money, nowhere to stay and no way of getting home. I get through most of the wine pretty quickly, which steadies me slightly. The panic has subsided a little, and my head is slightly more together than it was.
The booze has given me the courage to turn my phone back on. Ninety-six missed calls. I turn it straight back off again. What a stupid, stupid bastard I am.
If I’d have stayed at home today I’d be cooking dinner for the kids by now. They’d be telling me about their day, showing me pictures they’d painted and laughing about what they got up to. I’d be showing them how to chop an onion or how to make text go bold using Word. Proper Dad stuff.
Not this. Not this outrageously selfish day trip to fucking Brussels. Not sitting in a cafe without a penny to my name, effectively about to be arrested for not paying for my wine. “What did you do today, Dad?” “Oh I got absolutely fucked on the Eurostar and lost almost a thousand pounds in cash. How was school, Darling?”
With one glass left in the post-funeral bottle of wine, I approach the bar again. “I don’t suppose you know anywhere I can sell an iPad, do you?” I ask, timidly. “There’s a few places around here. Why, what you got?” he asks enthusiastically. “Oh just my iPad, I’ve had enough of it.” I tell him.
“What’s wrong with it?” he asks. “No nothing, actually its only a few weeks old. Its the latest one. I’ve just had enough of being tied to it all the time you know? Too much screen time. My Mum passing has away has given me a new perspective.” I bullshit, again.
“Right yea, totally. How much do you want for it?” he asks. I immediately begin to calculate the cost of getting home and maybe hanging around here for a few hours before I leave. That wine was very nice.
“Well, they’re like 700 euros new, so shall we say 550?” I offer. “I’ll give you 500 cash, mate.” “Done.” I breathe another sigh of relief as I realise I won’t have to sleep under a bridge or join a local branch of ISIS to prevent myself from starving to death tonight. Or even worse, not being able to get hold of a drink.
“Do you mind if I test it for a bit, make sure it’s all working ok?” he asks, baring in mind I’d let him smash me over the head with a chair if it meant him giving me five hundred euros in cash. “Yea of course mate, go for it. I’ll just have another bottle of wine and chill out for a bit.” I say, very slightly excited to be definitely going home tonight.
He hands over another bottle of wine and opens it in one swift move. “Sweet as, this bottle’s on me mate. Enjoy.” “I will!” I say, as I take it with me back to the table, now with nothing to watch but the rolling news headlines on the TV above me. All in French. My phone rendered useless for fear of all the missed calls and angry texts from my wife. What a pussy I am.
I settle into the wine and surprisingly, a Belgian soap on the TV above. The second bottle is dissapearing rapidly. I toy with the idea of getting a cheap hotel and taking my chances. Stupid decisions once again seeping into my consciousness. For now, I settle on that train back to London.
The bartender approaches my table with a wad of euros in his hand. “Here you go mate, nice doing business with you.” “Thanks, I’m glad you got a good deal.” I reply, already resenting myself for selling an ipad a few weeks after I bought it. Another senseless waste of money.
“Can I get another bottle of that wine?” “Another one? You sure can put it away. I knew a guy like you once.” he says, gravely. I laugh: “Really?” “Yep.”
He returns from the bar whilst talking on his phone, and puts the third bottle of wine in two hours down in front of me. I pour another glass, and try to focus my dry and tired eyes on the remainder of the Belgian soap still playing.
I start to fall asleep, my eyes closing every 20 seconds or so. The sound of a door slamming as a couple enter the bar wakes me with a jump. The bartender notices. I mouth the words ‘sorry mate’ to him but he pretends not to see and serves the new customers.
I try to pull myself together but my thinking is foggy and its difficult to focus on anything. I start to not care about the train home, wanting now just to curl up into a ball and sleep. I force myself to wake up and take a large slurp of wine. The barman comes back to my table, wearing his coat. He puts a cup of coffee down in front of me.
“Mate, it was nice to meet you. I really think you need to get this down you. And when you’ve done that, you should give these guys a call. But its up to you.” He hands me a card. Alcoholics Anonymous. Oh for fuck’s sake. “Thanks, I will.” I say, with absolutely no intention of calling the number on the card. Ever. “Saved my life, I swear.” he tells me. He gets up and leaves.
I push the coffee away and down the rest of the wine. Gathering my things I walk the few hundred feet back into the train station and into the ticket office. The fare back to London is three hundred quid, standard walk-up fare rate.
So far today, my drinking has cost me the seven hundred and fifty quid I lost on the train and my new iPad. And what about my marriage? But that’s nothing compared to the loss that awaits me at home. Why do I always need to reach this point before considering the cost of my insatiable need to be alone and drink to oblivion?
I sit in the waiting room and wait for the train, drunk and ruined. I catch my reflection in the window. A family pass by my seat excitedly discussing their trip to Belgium. They notice me and hurry past, horrified by the man sitting in front of them.
I arrive in London and go home. My wife and kids are gone. A note on the table says: “Gone to visit my Mum.” It’s another two years before I call the number on the card.
Here’s a tiny question. What is the lesson Covid is trying to teach us? As we settle in to a new normal, where Covid is going permanent, and there’s not much anyone can do about it except the billionaires who could vaccinate the world, but won’t — what should we be learning?
I think of Covid as a message backwards, from the future. And it says something like this. Life as you knew it is now over. The future is now going to become a bitter and bruising battle for the basics. The basics. Air, water, food, medicine, energy. Things that many of us once took for granted, and assumed would simply be around, as if by magic.
That age is now coming to an end. Did you ever think that breathable air would be in short supply? Where you have to wear a mask, because the air could infect you with a respiratory virus? That is what the future looks like, except for all the basics.
Another way to say that is that a certain way of life is now coming to an end. To make that point, let me ask the question: why have Eastern countries done better on Covid than Western ones? What does that teach us about the future?
Well, the first thing it teaches us that money and power and history are no guarantee of success in this battle for basics that the future is now about. Maybe the rich can buy clean air — but a whole society? Forget it.
People have to work together to provide one another the basics. And that is where the Western response to Covid has fallen down. Western nations are still fixated on illusory notions of freedom. But freedom itself is what is going to change radically in this age — if not by choice, then by the force of nature’s revenge.
Consider the example, as usual, of America. Americans wouldn’t cooperate with lockdowns. Governors revolted, and made it illegal to make people wear masks. Meanwhile, the Red States became the world’s worst Covid Belt, because people refused to stop…going to bars…having barbecues…eating at restaurants.
Then the vaccine arrived, and too many Americans fought against having to take it. Meanwhile, the President simply gave away patents for the vaccines, allowing them to be privatised, even though they were made with public money.
So the world is now unable to vaccinate people faster than they’re being infected, which means Covid will likely keep on spreading, and mutating, and becoming even more vaccine resistant. The result is that Covid has probably become a permanent fact of life — even air itself will be a luxury for the rich.
Americans, in other words, were obsessed with “freedom.” One certain idea of it. Freedom as an individualistic exercise in consumerism, in status and pleasure seeking. What Americans don’t tend to understand is that that old list of American “freedoms” is now badly obsolete. What good is it carrying a gun…when a tsunami or a megafire is approaching?
What good is it being able to battle over whose God is stronger…when you can’t breathe the air anymore? What good is the “freedom” for corporations to maximise profits… if it means people die preventable deaths?
Life as the American set of freedoms is over now. Let me enumerate a few of those. The freedom to waste and squander. The freedom to believe in any old malarkey you like, no matter how ignorant.
The freedom to abuse and exploit. The freedom to make the point of your life as shallow and foolish and stupid as you may want to, like just making more money. None of these things were ever really “freedom.”
What such freedoms really were and are is the toxic hangover of centuries of brutality. Americans think they should be free to waste — while half the world still goes without decent food, water, or sanitation.
They imagine they should be free to carry guns to Starbucks — while much of the world has been enslaved to pick those coffee beans. I’m not trying to moralize, just making a point. The world largely thinks of the American idea of freedom as a folly and a bewildering form of self-destruction.
Covid is trying to teach us, in no uncertain terms, that we are not really free in these old ways — and never were. They’re just paths to self-destruction. When we waste and squander, we pollute the skies, and the planet heats up. When we abuse the natural world, it bites back in the form of everything from pandemics to wildfires to floods.
Let me summarise what I am trying to say. The economist in me will put it this way. The global economy has been predicated on one simple transaction.
The West and North — and particularly America — overconsumes, and the East and South is who and what is exploited to make that possible. That transaction is now over. The age of Western overconsumption is now at an end. Even the West is starting to suffer shortages of the basics — beginning with air. By the next decade, water, food, and energy will be in shortage, there, too.
The West can continue to pretend it can overconsume — by which I mean spend too much on consumerist toys which cost the reefs, rivers, forests, animals, skies, not to mention the human potential of people in the East, who are mostly stuck on assembly lines making stuff for it.
Since that stuff is artificially cheap, those in the East are exploited — could you live on $3 an hour? — and by and large they stay poor. Because they stay poor, they don’t, in turn, have enough to invest in fighting climate change, mass extinction, ecological collapse themselves — or even to give themselves decent food, water, sanitation, and medicine, which means pandemics that then affect the globe erupt at an increasing pace now.
That is why the whole world is coming to a standstill. This fatal bargain is now coming to an end. One great economic age is ending — the age of Western overconsumption.
In hard terms, that means the West consuming more than the entire planet can provide sustainably, which is precisely why catastrophes from climate change to mass extinction to pandemics are now ripping our lives apart.
So where do we go from here? Well, we must ask the question: how did that age come to be, the age of Western overconsumption? If we want to fix it, that is. The answer, though, is ugly and difficult, and many people don’t want to hear it, much less understand it.
The age of Western overconsumption is really a consequence of a simple, brutal, dismal truth: 20% of the world is rich and white, and 80% is poor and not white. The 20% of the world that is rich and white is precisely that portion which enslaved, brutalised, and colonized the part that is 80% poor and not white.
Those centuries of abuse and exploitation led the rich and white societies to enjoy a generous surplus. You can think of that as everything from gold in bank vaults to all those hundreds of kinds of coffee and tea and sugar that you can find today in the aisles at a Walmart.
The age of Western overconsumption is a product of the previous age of Western slavery, colonialism, and empire. That age allowed the West to get rich — and the West then spent its riches on consumption.
Economists once upon a time argued all this was a good thing. That buying stuff from poor countries would allow those countries to prosper, too. And that has been the case, to a minor degree — there have been some successes, like South Korea and Japan, and some half-successes, like China and Malaysia. But “externalities” dominated even this effect.
What that means in plain English is that while rich Westerners buying stuff from poor Easterners might have balanced back the scales of empire and slavery — hey, at least they were being paid now, right? — nobody much noticed the effects on the planet.
This central transaction of the global economy, rich Westerners buying stuff from poor Easterners, was flawed in one central way. It was artificially cheap.
Because it was still OK to exploit poor Easterners — to pay them the least that rich Westerners could get away with, instead of enough, say, to have decent water, food, sanitation, medicine, income — why wouldn’t it then be perfectly OK to abuse and exploit nature, too?
The East lost wars, and ended up enslaved. Nature has never really fought back at all — until now. And finally we are seeing how terrible its fury can be. Even the West can’t outrun an age of catastrophe like the one we face now — like I said, it’s already doing worse than the East when it comes to Covid.
So how do we fix all this? Well, the truth is that “we” probably can’t. I can tell you how, but Westerners by and large aren’t interested. What they seem to be interested in is never changing.
In ways to be able to go on living in wasteful, harmful, toxic, abusive, exploitative ways, like Americans are — if you tell them how do that, they will admire and respect you. Gentle and wise Europe has made some progress, it’s true.
But mostly, when you tell people like Americans that they must change now, and change fast, they give you the look: their eyes go dead and their jaws tighten. They’re holding in the anger of having to hear something that they don’t want to, aren’t equipped to, can’t handle.
“We” aren’t going to fix the age of Western overconsumption. What it would take is something like this: the rich West agreeing to pay nature. After all, nature works hard for us — it provides us everything from water to air to food to medicine.
If the rich West were ready to agree to pay nature for the work it does — instead of exploit and abuse it — then treaties could be made to compensate Eastern countries and their people. To pay them living wages for doing things like caring for rivers, reefs, forests, oceans, animals, and so forth, instead of just toiling away on assembly lines to make cheap junk for rich Westerners.
But that is not going to happen, probably. I say that for a very simple reason. I have millions of readers, and the one topic nobody much in the West wants to hear about is fixing the future.
They say they want to hear about it. They are constantly asking me what to do about the state of things. But when I write about it, only a handful truly listen. Not even a handful. So what I think the majority of Westerners mean when they ask me what to do is: “tell me a way to never have to change.”
Having a serious discussion with Westerners, with Americans in particular, about fixing the future has become impossible. That should be self-evident, though. Too many aren’t willing to change their lives even when a lethal pandemic is ripping through their societies.
And yet the rich West is the only part of the world with the money to really allow the future to be fixed. What does that tell you? It tells me it won’t be. And so what will happen, probably, is this.
The world will go on spiralling headlong into the new Dark Age it’s entered. The fools and fanatics and extremists will go on rising to power, because the average person is incapable of change, but the old way of life is collapsing, and in that vacuum is where every fascism is really born.
Life as you know it really is coming to an end, my friend. If it hasn’t already. The problem? Not enough of us can face that simple fact with courage, grace, truth, kindness, love, and goodness. And so what do you expect to happen? If change can’t, then only collapse is left.
Over the years, I’ve predicted America’s collapse into fascism, hate, and backwardness. Often with enough detail and precision to chill many of you. And in response, you often wondered, here in the comments, or in emails to me, “Should I leave?” I’ve left the question open. I’ll come back to why in just a moment. But now the time has to come to say it openly.
Over the years, we’ve discussed America’s abysmally low quality of life, and compared to Europe, Canada, or even many middle income countries, it’s one thing to wonder about leaving for a higher quality of life. It’s quite another to understand that the end of American democracy is now in sight, and is becoming more and more certain by the day.
You should make exit plans from a collapsing America. Why? America’s future is now more or less obvious to anyone with eyes to see. Let me begin at the beginning.
America was given one last chance to preserve not just its “democracy,” but to stave off its inevitable plunge into fascism. That last chance was nothing short of a minor miracle. The coup on Jan 6th was stopped by a handful of brave police officers. Many of them literally gave their lives.
Why? To prevent fascist militants from accomplishing their goal, which was to stop the counting of Presidential votes — even if by massacring anyone standing in their way. Remember those gallows? Remember the open cries for violence?
Societies do not often get chances like this. America got incredibly, incredibly lucky. If the coup had been successful — and it came within a hairs’ breadth of being successful — anything could have happened.
The election could have been stopped, a full blown constitution crisis would have ensued, Trump easily could have declared martial law. American democracy would have come to an end.
So what have Democrats done with that fateful, incredibly fortunate second chance? They’ve squandered it. Yes, I know they passed a bill today. That bill is inconsequential. It adds up to less than 1% of GDP.
What does it actually take to stop fascism? Not in “my opinion,” but as in “what we know from history?” Three things. One, a socio-economic reconstruction plan, on the order of about half of a society’s economy, not 1% of GDP.
Two, a process of special justice, which punishes the fascists for their transgressions and abuses of power. Three, the cultural impact of all that, which translates into stronger and more robust norms against hate and brutality and supremacy.
The Democrats have not led America to that place. Instead, something dark and sinister is happening. Again, it’s not “my opinion” — it’s a fact. They are losing key races across the country. The midterms will be a rout. Why?
Because American fascism has hardened and grown and matured. Think about the last round of Big Lies. “They stole the election from us!” A society has to say never again. And mean it. Economically, culturally, socially.
Now think about how Glenn Youngkin just won Virginia: “They’re coming for our kids!” Us. Our. Who are we talking about? Well, that’s coded — or maybe not so coded — language. It is the open language of white supremacy and fascism.
“Us” and “our” mean a certain kind of American. You can call it “white America,” though that’s certainly too broad, or you can call it “working class white America,” though plenty of downwardly middle class whites are part of this movement. This fascist movement. Which is Trumpism. And now it’s evolving and maturing.
“They’re coming for our kids” is a much, much more sinister and dangerous lie than “they stole the election from us!” Your kids are the most important thing in your life. “They’re coming for our kids” is a giant leap for American fascism. It is the kind of Big Lie that caused a mass hysteria, a moral panic, amongst Weimar Germans, and turned them genocidally against the Jews.
It is a raw appeal to emotion, which triggers rage and aggression and hostility on a primal level. That is why you could see the bizarre scenes of parents screaming death threats at teachers and principals at town meetings.
There are levels of fascist Big Lies. “They stole the election from us!” Is a political Big Lie. But “they’re coming for our kids!” is on a very, very different level. It is a cultural Big Lie. A social Big Lie. And most of all, a supremacist Big Lie.
Nobody is coming for Trumpist America’s kids. I told the story of how I was violently abused growing up in Virginia as a simple example. It’s minority kids who are under immense and profound threat in America today — and they will be tomorrow.
Who’s really getting beaten and bullied and harassed at schools? It’s not regular old white kids. It’s minorities, Jews, Mexicans, gays, women, everyone else, at least most of the time. And that dynamic is of course mirrored across American society. Who rises to the top?
American whites do, which you can see in everything from media to finance to business to the arts to the sciences to literature. Nobody is coming for America’s white people. How could anyone? They have all the guns, money, rights power.
So what are they so angry about? Well, the idea of any kind of progress for anyone else seems to drive them into a rage. That is because all the entitlements they enjoy are called “privilege.”
I don’t like that word, but in America’s case it’s true. To say that little Johnny shouldn’t have to learn about slavery is only to say that he should be able to on being ignorant, and perhaps a bigot, like his parents — the
Trumpists — are.
And if he beats up a few minorities at school, harasses them, insults them…well, that’s just boys being boys. Just like, apparently, only white dudes get to be CEOs because everyone else is dumber than them, I guess. You see my point. What is White America so angry about? All those Big Lies are designed to feed into the latent sense of supremacism and entitlement. Yes, living in a more equal society does mean the loss of some forms of privilege.
Like saying no, my kid shouldn’t be insulting minorities or gays “for fun.” Or like saying hey, maybe our society should actually be fairer. But fairness, to the one in power, looks a whole lot like dispossession. So why tell the Big Lie? To stoke all those Trumpist parents into a whole new level of rage, anger, violence. To drive them literally senseless with fear. If someone’s coming for little Johnny…who are they? Why?
Now I’ve got to protect my kids at all costs. This is a horrific Big Lie to tell. It is the culmination of what I’ve tried to describe above. Manipulating White Americans into rage over the loss of their privileges, which are unfair ones to have to begin with. Stoking the fears of racial anxiety to a white-hot flame, by making white Americans imagine they’re genuinely under attack.
These are old, old fears. You have to understand them that way to really know them. White Americans have lived with these fears since they colonised the land. The Natives were attacking them. The slaves would rebel. They’re coming for our wives and kids are the oldest, most primal fears in the white American imagination. And here they are, being used to drive white America into a mindless rage, all over again.
The cycle of hate is repeating itself. It is being allowed to repeat itself precisely because the Dems haven’t done enough to stop fascism. It’s true the Dems probably couldn’t have done the things I talked about — a socioeconomic reconstruction plan on the order of a New Deal, etc.
But they haven’t even tried. And it only really begs the question: well, maybe America’s just essentially a fascist country then. So Youngkin won easily in Virginia. Without a platform. With no political experience whatsoever. Simply by telling the Big Lie that “they’re coming for your kids” to white working class America.
That template is going to be followed across the country — and Trumpists are going to believe it. The question of course is: why are they going to believe it? After all, the only possible thing really coming for little Johnny is another kid with a gun. And they support gun “rights,” to the point where guns have more rights than women.
Trumpists are going to believe the Big Lie because they are still possessed by paranoia and rage. They feel entitled to the soil, and everything on it, by virtue of blood. You can still trigger rage in them with the old lie: “They’re coming for our wives and kids!” Last time, that led to slavery, genocide, apartheid, segregation.
What will it lead to this time? That a Glenn Youngkin can trigger white rage on a mass level, drive it to the level of mass hysteria, make a society senseless with fury, with that one little Big Lie? That white Virginians were gullible enough to believe that their kids were under attack?
Only this time it wasn’t communism or rebel slaves…but “CRT”…a theory (LOL)? It tells us everything about the future American politics, which is that it’s just like the past. All of that is a long, long way to see: you can see the future from here. You meaning you. Anyone vaguely sane and thoughtful should be able to see what is going to happen next.
The Democrats will lose in the midterms. They’ll lose the Presidency. They’ve barely been able to muster the littlest will to fight fascism at all — meanwhile, fascism is now telling the kinds of Big Lies that actually lead to genocide.
Telling those Big Lies, the platform of the GOP is now openly about ideological and then ethnic cleansing, like in Texas, where women don’t have rights anymore, or like in Virginia and Ohio, where they’re not about to, either.
As white America’s driven into a mass hysteria of white-hot rage by the Bigger Lies of “they’re coming for your kids! Your wives! Your land!” — Trump wins again. And you should know what’s going to happen when Trump wins again. The abuses of power will be much, much worse. This time, it’s going to be American families separated.
American kids and moms thrown in concentration camps. Martial law and military justice will be deployed against critics and opponents. Every school-board thug will be the town’s local chief Gestapo officer, policing kids and parents alike for thoughtcrime.
Want to live in that kind of society? You shouldn’t stick around for what’s coming, my friend. I’ve held back for as long as I could, because I felt there was still a small enough chance — a slender one — that, even if only by sheer dumb luck, America might just make it.
That chance is now gone. The game is over. There is no stopping what’s coming, and what’s coming is something like Russia, the Balkans, or America in the Jim Crow era. You should make an exit plan, now. You don’t have to use it right away. But you should make it and have it. You should have an option you can exercise to escape what’s coming in America.
I know that makes me sound like some late-night TV hysteric. I’m sorry to sound like that. I wish I was only trying to scare you. Sadly, like I said, anyone should be put together what I’ve outlined for you. If you want me to (tell me in the comments), I’ll give you some tips and ways to make an exit plan.
No, it’s not easy to do such a thing. But now is the time. You have about two years left, maybe three, before all of the above — Bigger Lies, white rage, growing hate, mounting fanaticism, fascism going local — really culminate in serious disaster and horror. After Trump gets elected again, it’ll take maybe six to nine months for the next wave of abuses — American families separated, little Gestapos everywhere — to begin.
That gives you tops three years. That’s a good amount of time to make an exit plan. Don’t wait. Don’t dawdle. Make it now. Even if you think what I’ve said is mostly nonsense, and there’s only, say a 25% chance of it happening…do you really want to risk it? You should at least have the option, even if you never use it.
I’m sorry to have to say it, and plenty of people will object vociferously. They’ll say it’s better to be patriotic and whatnot. I’ve never had strong feelings about America being some kind of home. It’s always hated me too much for that. Can’t you see it now, all that hate, growing every day, like a cancer? This one’s terminal.
Get out while you can. Because America’s not going to get another chance. The last one was the last one — and it was squandered. That leaves you with one goal, I guess. Survival, my friend. Every homeless person has one thing in common. They’re not lazy or bad with money. They’re tired.
That’s what a guy told me one afternoon. I’d spent weeks interviewing the homeless for a story in a magazine for suburban christian moms. The guy was barely older than I was. He’d spent a year living in a cemetery. It was the only place you could get away from the police. The guy told me what he did the first week after moving into a permanent shelter. (They have limited slots.) He didn’t start reading Simon Sinek He didn’t ask himself his why. He slept.
He stayed in bed for 12 to 14 hours a day. “The streets wear you out,” he said. The folks who ran the shelter didn’t have a problem with it. They said it was normal for someone to sleep that much. “You can’t rush them. You can’t make them do anything else until they recover.”
Back then, I wasn’t tired. I had more energy than I knew what to do with. I was going to conquer the world. I was ready to work so hard. Now, I get it. Everything has worn everyone out. There’s a fatigue in the world. You’ve felt it. Everyone’s exhausted now. (Well, almost everyone.) Talk to anyone with kids. Anyone who cares for someone. Anyone who “owns” a home. Doctors. Nurses. Teachers. Cashiers. Servers.
We’ve had it. It wasn’t just the pandemic. The last year put a big bloody period on a decade of back-breaking, mind-melting work. We have little to show for it. We’re tired of constant political spin. The world is shocked that a 78-year-old man fell asleep during a boring speech about climate change. Seriously?
Give the guy a break. He should’ve retired 10 years ago. He couldn’t. After raising two kids without their mother, serving for decades as a dedicated albeit imperfect public servant, helping a traumatized son deal with drug addiction, he rose up to fight fascism.
He won, with our help. Now this tired old man has to undo fifty years of greed and injustice, while dealing with ecological collapse, massive social unrest, a sputtering economy, and a resurgent labor movement. It’s a lot. You’d fall asleep, too.
By the way, the last president wasn’t even going to these conferences. He wouldn’t leave his resort to visit graves because it was raining. He threw a big tantrum about it. Remember all that? Here’s my point: That 78-year-old man who fell asleep is trying his best. In that moment, he was all of us. He was tired. We’re tired of lazy, greedy bosses.
Millennials have a reputation for being lazy and entitled. Now zoomers do too. A few 20-somethings started snapping selfies with avocados, and suddenly it became a whole thing.
It’s easy to vilify a generation. Look at the numbers. As a group, our generation has worked harder, longer hours than anyone. You can’t deny that now. Check out the stories about everyone from bankers to teachers logging 80 and 90 hours a week. Our corporate lords knew what they were doing. They were working us to death. How did our bosses respond to the negative press?
They pledged to give us Saturdays off. Wow, thanks. Then they drowned social media with ads describing their work culture like a family, and talking about values. Try not to hurl.
They tanked a higher minimum wage. They stripped family leave and childcare assistance from our infrastructure bill. Every time it looks like the pandemic might end, they hustle us back to the office, and not even because it makes us more productive.
They want power. That’s all. We’re tired of energetic 20-somethings. The other day, I watched a video by a productivity guru. I don’t know why. I guess it’s a perverse form of entertainment. Anyway, here’s what he said: My friends always ask me why I’m never tired. I always have so much energy. Here’s my secret formula. Shut up. We know the real reason.
He’s never tired because he’s young, single, and child free. He doesn’t have any sick relatives. He works one day a week at his real job. He has a team of underpaid assistants. Above all, he’s willing to sell a fiction that being more productive makes the slightest difference.
Hey, it’s cool. You can be like that. Just don’t bullshit us. Don’t gaslight us into thinking we’re tired because we have poor sleep habits. We’re tired of it. We’re tired of ads and influencers. I’ve noticed something about inspirational writers who want to coach us on better habits. They’re all marketers.
Their ads and affiliate gigs target us when we’re most vulnerable. When we’re tired from work. When we’re hungry. When we’re overwhelmed. They tell us don’t cook. Subscribe to this meal kit.
Try this app. Try these clothes. Try this diet. Watch me dance on your phone. Desire to be like me, be with me, or just lick my pink marshmallow wig. We’re tired of that, too. We’re tired of the tone police. People talk about cancel culture.
Well, I’m tired of the tone police. The minute someone speaks up to tell everyone how they really feel about the world and our future, the tone police show up and give them a big lecture. They talk to us about being polite.
Nope, not anymore. We tried that. We toiled in our tiny corners of the world, trying to make a difference. We picked up trash, only to watch more people dump more trash in the same spot. We got judged and yelled at and called snowflakes for gently promoting things like education and compassion.
So, now we’re loud. We’re a little nasty, and a little cynical. It’s because we’re tired. We’re tired of nobody listening. We’re tired of expending ten tons of energy to get a few people to move half an inch. Mostly, we’re just tired.
We’re worn out. We’re tired of complacency. It’s easy to judge a 78-year-old man for falling asleep during a speech, after traveling halfway around the world. Talk about virtue signaling. It’s easy to blame democrats for all of our problems. Maybe you’ve seen the polls. Most Americans don’t even know what’s in the infrastructure bills our politicians are fighting over. It’s like they don’t care.
A lot of people don’t want their lives to get better, if it means letting go of their toxic dreams and embracing big, “evil” government. They don’t want the world to improve for everyone, just them. They’d rather watch productivity videos and dream about making a million bucks off dogecoin, or shiba inu, or whatever meme stock is trending.
They want to be like Elon. It’s easy to judge someone for speaking up, by asking them what they’re doing to change the world. The truth is, none of us can go around saving the world 24 hours a day, for free. Some of us tried. Now we’re tired. We all need more naps. There’s actually one area where I agree with all the life coaches. We need more sleep, as soon as possible. We’re all exhausted.
We’re stressed. We’re overworked. We’re overwhelmed. We’re on edge. At any given moment, hardly any of us are thinking clearly. We’re wired to explode at the slightest inconvenience or provocation.
I’m thinking about all the Karens right now. I’m thinking about the guy who made the news by pulling a gun on a barista, because she forgot the cream cheese on his bagel. I’ve judged them. I’ve thought about their privilege. That’s true, but I also know this: They’re tired, too.
We’ve all been conditioned to work all the time, and to punish ourselves by sacrificing our rest. It doesn’t seem to matter how many books, articles, podcasts, or videos we come across telling us to sleep more. We don’t do it.
We don’t allow ourselves. We keep forgetting. Sleeping is good for us. It’s good for society. It’s good for the planet. The fewer people we have making and consuming pointless crap, the better. As we just saw, the world doesn’t respond to tired people with sympathy. It crucifies them. We’ve got to stop. I’m with the old guy who nodded off during a speech. We need more naps.
Later when I made a comeback it took me minutes to understand and I continued which made my consciousness ask silly questions “why wasn't I able to interpret that in the first go.
Cognitive abilities are as strange as they haven't fully known yet but we know that the brain is less genetically inheritable, while the Amygdala does the basic surviving moves and the cerebral cortex on a more sophisticated level.
The region responsible for higher cognition only holds around 20 percent of all our brain’s neurons, a similar proportion found in other mammals, says Suzana Herculano-Houzel, a neuroscientist at the Institute of Biomedical Science in Rio de Janeiro.
She discovered a novel way of counting neurons — dissolving brains into a homogenous mixture, or “brain soup.” Using this technique she found that we have an average of 86 billion neurons. So having these thread-like structures make you smarter?
Well, things are aligned in that direction but I think it would be too early to draw some conclusions. This was how my travel goes from handwriting to cognition, I hope it well serves your time. And I have to write more note
Most of us are under the impression that we control our thoughts and actions. To some extent we do — however, it’s fairly minuscule. Contrary to popular belief, a majority of our conscious perceptions, actions, and thoughts are actually produced from unconscious mental processes.
To further exaggerate, the unconscious mind has the capacity to process 11 billion bits of data of information in a second, whereas the conscious mind can only process approximately 400 of those bits (ThinkbyNumbers.org, 2020).
The brain is an incredibly complex computational device. Our thoughts are carried out primarily through neural calculations and algorithms. Due to the complexity of our neuronal network (the information processing center), the brain uses shortcuts and default pathways in order to efficiently communicate information.
We developed this automatic computational mechanism as we evolved into more complex beings placed in more complex environments. Without this computational apparatus, we simply wouldn’t be able to process all the information and stimuli presented to us on a daily basis.
Although this function is fundamental to our survival, it has a tendency to distort the way we perceive the world around us. This rapid process of calculation typically falls below our threshold of awareness, so we often fail to recognize how distorted our thought processes really are. More importantly, these distortions consequently lead us to believe things are much worse than they actually are.
When I learned this during my undergrad, I naturally started paying more attention to my automatic judgements, biases, and overall thoughts. As I became more aware of my thoughts, I realized some of my automatic thought processes were skewed. They did not align with how I wanted to think or react given a particular encounter.
More notably, they did not minister to my ideal psychological state and overall well-being. They were toxic and irrational. This is when I discovered my subconscious mind was controlling me — I was not my automated thoughts.
It’s inevitable we’ll be faced with misalignments between the way we want to think or act and the way our brain wants to think or act. Our brains are hardwired for survival, not for producing the most ideal psychological and mental state.
Upon coming to the realization that my conscious reasoning was not aligned with my subconscious reasoning, I was able to pinpoint the overarching problem. My lack of awareness led to a lack of control. The solution? Become more aware.
Subsequently, I began reconstructing my problematic narratives instead of falling victim to the ones that have been computationally wired into my daily thought processes. Becoming more mindful of how my brain processed information led me down numerous transformative rabbit holes, ones of which significantly improving the quality of my life.
In spite of sharing this experience, I wanted to introduce the basic neuroscience that allowed me to embark on this self-awareness journey. So, down the rabbit hole we go.
In order to understand the nature of our mind, I like to think of the mind as a machine with two separate operators: the unconscious/automatic operator, and the conscious/deliberate operator. As I’ve mentioned, the unconscious mind is the chief operator who is responsible for processing the billions of bits of information presented to us on a daily basis.
Processing all this information creates an internal dialogue. You know, that little voice inside your head that can’t seem to turn off? Yeah, that. That’s often who we identify ‘ourselves’ with.
The conscious mind is co-chief to our subconscious (I will use the terms ‘unconscious’ and ‘subconscious’ interchangeably). This is where deliberate, rational, and analytical thinking takes place. Using this system takes a greater amount of energy because it takes effort and awareness. For the sake of reserving our energy and making efficient judgements, we rarely exercise this system.
Now that we have a general understanding of the two systems, there are some caveats that need further exploration. It must be noted that although information may descend down default pathways for the sake of communicating efficiently, this does NOT imply the messages are being processed in the most advantageous manner.
The brain follows pre-existing connections and associations acquired through past experiences. New experiences that have associations to past events are going to be interpreted and processed in a way that is coherent with the existing information. Our brain uses this procedure for the sake of constructing quick and cohesive judgements of our current circumstances.
Even when provided with an educational experience, our brains will naturally encode the information to fit into our personal framework or twist it to fit more coherently with the existing information stored. . . but that’s a discussion for another time.
Our brains have become so advanced and efficient that sometimes it results in cognitions, behaviors, or habits that create more disparities in our lives. Without deliberate intervention of the conscious mind, the brain will respond with whatever response is most habitual.
These deeply-rooted thought patterns sometimes result in polarized thinking and cognitive distortions. The worst part? We unknowingly continue to reinforce these beliefs over time.
Yet, we remain auspicious because it’s not our brains main objective to deceive and limit us through utilizing its computational nature. Distortions appear merely as a byproduct of our brain’s attempt to keep up with the cognitive, social, environmental, and intellectual advancements we’ve made as a species.
In order to become more aware of these distortions, we must learn that unfavorable emotions or thoughts constantly returning to one’s mind should be a signal for reflection.
I found that in such instances, analyzing these recurring thoughts using the conscious/analytical mind is far more advantageous than relying on the default responses the subconscious mind prefers to reply with. The first step is becoming aware of distorted thoughts. Then comes the hard part.
Reinterpretation of our distorted thought patterns requires us to revisit unfavorable past experiences and emotions. Our brains generally avoid doing this because it doesn’t stimulate our pleasure centers. It’s considered a threat (Remember… our brains are hardwired for survival). This is where our brains may be misleading us.
We often lose the opportunity to learn and grow amidst the unpleasantness of an adverse experience or emotion. By falling victim to distorted thought processes because we fear reassessment of past traumas, we close ourselves off to expansion of our very own well-being. We become restricted to automatic computational mechanisms that make us liable to faulty perceptions of the world around us.
In conclusion, becoming aware of our thought patterns gives us a greater sense of control in our lives and the outcomes that come along with it. We are equipped with tools to dismantle unwanted self-limiting habits, beliefs, and perceptions and fully capable of replacing them with more productive ones. We’re typically just unaware of it.
Our current circumstances exist as they do because of the way we think of ourselves in our world. Our thoughts manifest into our beliefs, our beliefs transpire into our expectations, our expectations guide our attitudes, our attitudes control our behavior, and our behaviors determine our state of being.
The pursuit towards creating new constructive thought patterns is not an easy one. It takes will and diligence. With that being said, I am a firm believer the most difficult ventures in life are often the most rewarding. For this reason, I find that working towards self-awareness and summoning up the courage to revisit past traumas may very well be a skill that can significantly improve our lives.
Cybersecurity is extremely important – now more than ever. If you start to do research, however, you’ll find a debate going on about which operating system is the safest. These days, more IT professionals and companies are preaching the benefits of Linux systems.
There are definitely some security advantages to the platform. But like everything in the computer world, so much comes down to user training. Even if you have a very secure platform, a virus can still be a problem. So let’s take a look at Linux and some of the advanced security measures you need to take.
Linux is safer than macOS for the same reason macOS is safer than Windows. Simply put, Linux has lower market share. So hackers are generally less interested in attacking it. The vast majority of hacks aren’t targeted against one company in particular.
Instead, hackers attack a large number of computers and servers hoping that viruses and malware will land in some of them. Since Windows controls 75 percent of the market, it makes sense for hackers to target that operating system.
Linux has never been easier to use. Even complete newbies can learn to operate the newest OS in a few minutes. One of the key differences between Linux and Windows / macOS is that you don’t just download and open attachments.
Instead, before executing attachments, you need to set it up and make sure each user has the right permissions before they can open a specific file. These extra steps prevent internal users from inadvertently running virus files.
Linux is open source. This means there’s a huge group of developers always checking for issues and determining fixes. Whereas it may take months for big companies like Apple and Microsoft to identify a problem and then issue a security patch.
Linux users can repair it themselves and have the code issued in minutes. This minimizes downtime and the potential threat of viruses. Linux isn’t Bulletproof Linux does have many amazing advantages, but that doesn’t make it bulletproof. Hackers can target computers no matter what operating system they run on.
Like any other platform, it’s up to the users to take security measures into their own hands if they want to be safe online. Here are some of the security measures they need to follow: Use a VPN
A virtual private network is essential for any device connected to the internet. It doesn’t matter what operating system you use or whether it’s a desktop, laptop, tablet, or a smartphone. VPN encrypts and conceals your network traffic.
Therefore, if you happen to use public WiFi, hackers cannot gain access to your computer and personal information. It is one of the best ways to prevent an attack on your computer.
Updates can be very annoying. You might be halfway through your favorite Netflix show only to see an update pop up. As frustrating as this is, updates are very important. More often than not, they include urgent security patches.
The sooner you install them, the safer your device will be. Though most distro’s updates are not as annoying or intrusive as the other OSes. You don’t even have to reboot your system in most cases. The vast majority of apps in the official app stores (software repositories) have been vetted by their hosts. It’s rare for them to contain malware – although not impossible.
On the other hand, anything you download from a third party site has not been checked for viruses. For that reason, scan all files before you install anything. Most operating systems provide you with a free built-in firewall. Be sure to use it. Sometimes apps may need special permissions because of it. For example, you might have to allow additional access or even turn it off for some apps.
Before you do that, research the app online. Check to make sure it has a solid reputation before granting that permission. Likewise, perform a virus and malware scan on your computer at least once per week.
One of the biggest trends in cybersecurity during the last couple of years has been the rise of password managers. It’s very likely they will become standard in a short time. Hackers have many different methods of gaining access to your accounts. They can use programs that try millions of password combinations a second to try to break in.
Nowadays, this is less common as security features like two-factor authentication have grown in popularity. However, hackers also use keyloggers which monitor your keystrokes. For example, you may accidentally download malware which then tracks keystrokes when you visit your bank accounts, emails, and social media.
Not only is your personal information at stake, hackers then use your accounts to target people you know. Therefore, use password managers to create strong passwords and keep them in a convenient place, so your accounts stay safe.
There are a lot more security measures and guidelines you need to follow, but that’s the gist of it. Do your own detailed research and always be careful. Linux has a slight edge in security compared to macOS and Windows.
This is mostly because fewer people use it, so it’s less of a target. In addition, Linux’s strong community of developers help minimize many external threats. However, it’s not invincible.
Ultimately, the most important thing is for admins and end-users to follow strong digital hygiene principles. Be sure to update your computer frequently. Be suspicious of unusual downloads and fishy websites.
Make sure you properly configure your system and software. Finally, use a VPN to protect your network connection and a password manager to store your passwords. By following these steps, you’ll be safe no matter which operating system you choose.
Richard Feynman is considered to be one of the most miraculous personalities in scientific history. The 1965 Nobel prize winner on QED (along with J. Schwinger and Tomonaga), Dr. Feynman was a remarkably amazing educator and a great physicist.
Feynman, along with many other contributions to science, had created a mathematical theory that accounts for the phenomenon of superfluidity in liquid helium. Thereafter, he had fundamental contributions (along with Murray Gell-Mann) to weak interactions such as beta decay.
In his later years, Feynman played a significant role in the development of quark theory by putting forward his Parton model of high energy proton collision processes. He also introduced basic new computational techniques and notations into physics.
Besides being a physicist, he was at various times repairer of radios, a picker of locks, an artist, a dancer, a bongo player, a great teacher, and a showman who successfully demonstrated the cause of the 1986 Challenger Shuttle Disaster as part of the Roger’s Commission.
A truer description would have said that Feynman was all genius and all buffoon. The deep thinking and the joyful clowning were not separate parts of a split personality… He was thinking and clowning simultaneously.” — Freeman Dyson, 1988 remark on Feynman.
Feynman at Caltech. The genius of Richard Feynman in evident from his three-volume books on physics called The Feynman Lectures on Physics, which are based on his lectures at Caltech during 1961–1963.
In his teenage years, Richard Feynman’s high school did not offer any courses on calculus. As a high-school teenager, he decided to teach himself calculus and read Calculus for the Practical Man.
Feynman always believed that if one cannot explain something in simple terms, one doesn’t understand it. A similar quotation is attributed to Albert Einstein as well. Whether or not it originally comes from Feynman, the idea is elegantly true and is, in fact, the basis for the Feynman technique of learning things.
Feynman is often attributed as The Great Explainer for his ability to explain complicated concepts in science, particularly physics, in extremely simple and understandable manner, in a way that in people from a non-scientific background could understand.
He opened a fresh notebook. On the title page he wrote: NOTEBOOK OF THINGS I DON’T KNOW ABOUT. For the first but not last time he reorganized his knowledge.
He worked for weeks at disassembling each branch of physics, oiling the parts, and putting them back together, looking all the while for the raw edges and inconsistencies. He tried to find the essential kernels of each subject.
The Feynman technique of Learning primarily involves four simple steps: Pick a topic you want to understand and start studying it. Pretend to teach the topic to a classroom or a child or someone who is unfamiliar with the topic. Go back to the resource material when you get stuck. Simplify and Organize
This technique is applicable to pretty much any discipline or any subject and concept despite the fact that it says the Feynman technique, it is not just limited to math or physics and can be applied to a wide range of fields.
The first step to use this technique is to choose the topic and start studying it. Now, studying doesn’t mean just memorizing the facts. In fact, Feynman himself was always against the culture of memorization and he always believed that one should learn and understand the principles rather than memorizing the facts or formulae.
Another good method of studying something is to write. Writing something on a piece of paper stimulates the Hippocampus of your brain, the part which is primarily responsible for memory and learning. If you want to master something, teach it. Teaching is a powerful tool for learning.
Explain the concepts in your own words and try to explain it to a child or someone who is completely unfamiliar with the topic. You can also pretend to explain it to a rubber duck that in on your table.
The idea is to try and break things down in as much simpler and plain language as possible. Try to use simple terms and vocabularies and don’t limit yourself to just the facts that you’ve learned.
You may as well include an example or two to make things simpler or create your own example making sure that it is associated with the main idea. It becomes much easier for you to understand things at a deeper level if you do so and helps you make connections.
All things are made of atoms — little particles that move around in perpetual motion, attracting each other when they are a little distance apart, but repelling upon being squeezed into one another. In that one sentence … there is an enormous amount of information about the world.
His suggestion that the most valuable information on scientific knowledge in a single sentence using the fewest words is to state the atomic hypothesis. This is an extremely crucial step where you learn where you are lacking. As you are explaining or writing things in simple terms, you always come across certain areas where you are find it difficult to explain or make connections or formulate examples.
This is the point where you get back to the resource material, the books or journals or internet, whatever your primary references are, and fill the gaps in your knowledge.
You can identify your gaps by several instances, like not being able to explain something or simplify something, forgetting some important points and so on. The idea is to get back, and revise things once again.
This helps you understand things even better. In this step, you know the areas that you need to work on and focus on which is a significant part of the learning process. Knowing one’s limitations and then working upon them to understand them better is the point of this step and it works like magic.
Here comes the product now. Once you have corrected your mistakes and straightened your difficulties, you simplify your explanation and make it better. You can always go back to Step-2 and Step-3 until you have a clear-cut understanding of the subject matter.
Your notes and examples are now in the simplest form possible and you have a deeper understanding of the topic under study. You can follow this approach over and over again till you feel like you have mastered the concept.
After your final explanation is ready, you can convey it to your colleagues or friends or professionals who are familiar with your field of expertise and reflect back upon your understanding of things. This Test-and-Learn method works wonders.
Feynman always believed that the truth lies in simplicity and that things can be better understood when they are simple and elegant. It is much easier to overcomplicate things, which often shows the lack of deep understanding.
The idea is to make things simple enough to be understood by anyone and then using that tool for deeper understanding for yourself.
The Feynman technique of Learning helps you learn and understand things by a different perspective. It can be used not just for academic purposes but also for building businesses, creating startups, mental models, and many more.
The Feynman Technique is a great method to develop mastery over pretty much set of information.
Eurasian jays, Garrulus glandarius, are members of the crow family. These large-brained birds hide food when it is abundant, and eat it later, when it is scarce. Previous studies have found that jays avoid theft by other jays by carefully deciding what food to hide, and where.
In one study, they preferred to hide their food behind an opaque barrier, rather than a transparent one, when another jay was watching. In a second study, they preferred to hide food that the watching jay had already eaten enough of, and thus did not want.
These studies suggest that jays have flexible cognitive skills when it comes to protecting their food. They respond to whether a potential thief can see their hiding place and to how much a thief might want the food they are stashing.
The next question is, can Eurasian jays combine these two pieces of information? For example, if a jay has two types of food they could hide when another jay is present, but only has one place to hide them (either in view or out-of-view of the other jay), does the first jay prefer to stash the food that the second jay has already eaten, and therefore does not want anymore, only when the hiding place is visible to second jay?
To find out, Amodio et al. watched Eurasian jays hiding macadamia nuts or peanuts in the presence of another jay. In the first setup, jays were given one food to hide and two possible hiding places, one opaque and one transparent, while being watched by a jay that had either had its fill of the food, or not tried it.
In the second setup, jays were given both foods to hide, but only had one place to hide them (either transparent or opaque); while being watched by a jay that had eaten enough of one of the foods. Contrary to expectations, the jays did not seem to be able to combine the information about what the other jay could see and what it had been eating. In fact, they seemed unable to respond to either piece of information.
When Amodio et al. repeated the original experiments, the jays did not seem to prefer to hide food out of sight, or to hide food that the watcher had already eaten. These results raise questions about the repeatability of experiments on food hiding strategies in birds of the crow family.
It suggests that previous findings should be further investigated, potentially to identify important factors that might affect the repeatability of food-hiding tactics. Repeating the experiments may show how best to investigate behavioural patterns in jays in the future.
There have been many changes around us, without us realizing it over time. While, the world is a place for humans and other living things to do their activities. Where in this case, there have been many developments in terms of conditions, especially in technology, and so on, have faced and adapted to the latest digital era.
If, we know that this world and the other things has a lot of changes happening. Both from several changing aspects of conditions, and positive also negative impacts on this world in the next 50 years. Then, we need to know more about that and we will know it in the next content.
World Conditions in 50 Year’s on the Positive side. We are heading to the state of the world 50 years in the future, Various technological advances around us are growing rapidly and beyond reason but can occur and be used in that year.
And at that time, humans have become accustomed to being faced with advanced and effective technology that facilitates their activities. So, we cannot deny that behind the technological advances in the world in the next 50 years. There was progress of a sophisticated era. No need for small talk, Here are some predictions regarding positive side or impact in the world in the next 50 years: Smartphones are being replaced by Augmented Reality (AR)
If, at this time we use handheld Smartphone screens. So in the years to come, handheld smartphone screens will be replaced by Augmented Reality (AR). Where AR dominates more and is used in forms such as watches, glasses, or necklaces, etc.
AR is technology that is able to insert information into the virtual world and display it in the real world like the hologram in the Star Wars movies. Quoted according to CNN, How AR works can be used to project information into the human field of vision and then manipulate the network through voice commands or gestures.
Then it will be assisted by haptic technology that simulates sensory feedback. With technological advances such as AR smartphone replacement in the future. So, humans don’t have to bother holding or pressing objects on the AR screen. In response to this, it can be marked that AR makes it easier for humans and also has effectiveness in use. We often meet Artificial Intelligence (AL) in everyday
Have you ever heard that Artificial Intelligence (AL) can fulfill human needs? From these questions, we can answer that. Yes, Artificial Intelligence (AL) enables machines to learn from experience, adapt to new inputs and perform tasks like humans.
Besides, AL is one of the artificial technologies that will often be used in the future. However, AL will not take on the role of humans as a whole in every activity. It’s just that the AL has a role to make it easier for humans when needed under certain conditions.
Then, what is AL in a nutshell? AL is a form of technology created to mimic human cognitive functions. Such as analyzing data, understanding patterns, recognizing the surrounding environment to making decisions. AL is not always in the form of a robot like the one in the film Science fiction genre.
However, AI is often in the form of computers, software, or even non-existent. AL has two categories between weak and strong. Weak Al created and trained to do a particular job. For example, virtual personal assistants such as Apple Siri, Amazon Alexa, Google Assistant and so on. Meanwhile, Strong Al known as general artificial intelligence is an AI system with general human cognitive abilities, Such as recommendation systems in eCommerce, social media, and other examples.
The use of AI is not only for personal gain, but in the future AI use is often found in fields such as: Healthcare, Retail, Banking, Manufacturing, Business, and so on. From the previous case, we can take the meaning that Artificial Intelligence (AL) plays an important role in the future.
Flying car and Autonomous Car become a common thing to find. Surely you are already familiar with this. Flying car and Autonomous Car one form of technological progress in the world that will often be used in the next 50 years.
Where the two sophisticated tools have the same role, namely preventing traffic accidents. In addition, both are sophisticated technological tools to make it easier for humans and increase driving efficiency.
If, flying car is used for travel far, and provide facilities for pedestrians. Likewise with Autonomous cars that can be used for long trips without worrying about sleeping in the middle of the road, then more fuel efficient because it uses safe electricity.
In response to this, we no longer need to worry about traffic jams, accidents, and other traffic risks. Because of this advanced technology, it has passed many safety and convenience tests. So, when in the next 50 years, the use of advanced vehicle technology becomes an age thing and is often used by humans. Body organs (Prosthetics) controlled by the human brain
Usually, organ transplants use other suitable human organs. So, it will not be used again in the next 50 years. In response to this, one only needs to use artificial technology, namely organs (prosthetics) created by scientists and engineering experts.
Where later, the object can move according to the command of the brain depending on the user. How come? in terms of how it works, later the wearer is implanted into the rest of the muscle tissue that was amputated.
After that, the sensors in that part of the muscle will pick up signals from the brain and transmit them to the limbs (prosthetics). Thus, the limb (prosthetic) can move as instructed by the wearer’s brain. From this, it is possible that in the next 50 years limbs (prosthetics) or bionics that move according to the brain’s orders, will often be used by some humans who have physical disabilities.
The use of Fossil Energy is decreasing and being replaced by New Renewable Energy or Solar System Energy. It is true that today, the world still uses fossil fuels a lot. However, it is possible that every year the world lacks fossil fuels.
So, respond to that. The world in the next 50 years, will often use the energy of the solar system. What is renewable energy or solar energy? According to the definition of the International Energy Agency (IEA), renewable energy is energy that comes from natural processes that are replenished continuously.
Besides, This is due to the energy produced by the Solar system such as the sun, waves, wind and water. More environmentally friendly and is from nature so it is endless. The development process of Solar Energy continues to be improved and developed for the better. Which can later be used frequently without any obstacles in housing, vehicles, and other purposes will use solar power more.
Those are some predictions that will be used in this world in the next 50 years. Where some of the above, is likely to happen. Given, the progress of the times is getting higher. And it is possible, these things will happen in the future. Other than that, We already know about the positive side or impact on the world in the next 50 years. There are so many sophisticated things that help human activities become more effective and efficient.
World Conditions in 50 Year’s on the Negative side. Behind it all, the world does not always survive with the positive side. However, it can also have a negative side or impact that the world will receive in the next 50 years.
Here are the impact or negative side of the world in the next 50 years: World Population will Increase also Disease outbreaks often appear Quoted from the latest official news website detikedu, the total world population in 2021 estimated at 7.85 billion people. Looking at the world’s population, in the current year.
Estimated world population in the next 50 years, reaching around 9 billion, which result in houses will be denser and closer also added with disease will spread faster. Where possible, due to the higher population density.
Unemployment and poverty levels are increasing and out of control. However, as technology advances in the future, it is possible that humans will be forced to work to meet the needs of life, where humans also coexist with machines or robots.
There is a Food Crisis. The next possibility that will happen in the future or what we are experiencing now. Namely the occurrence of a food crisis in the world. Supported by statement Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) predict, the world will experience a food crisis.
As a result, humans who have experienced an increase in population also shortage of food.Regardless of the possibility, some humans experience a lot of hunger or starve to death.
Prevent the possibility of that happening, each country is asked to better prepare a lot of special land for food reserves. And as much as possible, Every citizen can learn to grow crops and reduce consumption of rice and replaced by eating tubers or wheat.
The earth earth dries up, likewise with Dead Sea. In the next 50 years, the negative side that is likely to happen is that the Earth will become drier because global warming than previous years.
The Journal Nature Climate Change revealed that, if the average temperature of the earth rises by two degrees Celsius then in the next 32 years, the Earth could become a desert. Conditions and the temperature of the earth increases to become hot.
So, the possibility of humans at that time had to be forced to survive like staying at home by turning on AC (Air Conditioner). Prevent the possibility of increasing global warming, one of them is reduce greenhouse gas emissions. And so will the Dead Sea, which will live up to its name in the future, that the Sea will also experience a drought. Glaciers and Ice at at the poles will melt
The next possibility that will occur in the world in the next 50 years, namely melting of glaciers and polar ice caps. Indeed, this has already happened, but it is fully possible that it will happen in the future.
Where due to global warming, the poles, especially the dry north pole, are likely to experience hot summer. Other than that, sea level rises so that it has the potential to submerge some islands, especially in the coastal part of the sea. Humanity is forced to leave their premises or housing.
Those are some predictions from the negative side or impact that will happen to the world in the next 50 years. Is not a disaster but a warning for us as humans. It is required to maintain the natural conditions of the earth or this world, anything in excess is not good, then whatever will happen.
We should face it together. Besides, in terms of prediction or possibility from the positive and negative impacts that we already know. We can make it a preparation material for us humans to prepare ourselves to face the times in this world.
In its search for the grand unifying principles of nature, mainstream science often looks down. Considering an object to be no more than the sum of its parts, a complex thing is reduced to a conglomerate of basic atomic primitives and nothing more.
Taken to the extreme, we end up with the reductive physicalist view that the only real things in the universe are mindless physical atoms, and everything else simply emerges from their mechanical interactions.
Richard Dawkins presents a flavor of this radically reductive view on life in his bestselling book — The Selfish Gene. A living organism is reduced to a collection of cells, whose structure and configuration are said to be determined by the self-replicating genetic sequences encoded in its physical DNA.
Rejecting the possibility of any fundamental organization at a higher level, this view attempts to reductively explain all organic behavior and structure as emerging from the mechanistic work of selfish genetic replicators.
The only kind of entity that has to exist in order for life to arise, anywhere in the universe, is the immortal replicator. Instead, an organism’s morphological development is largely controlled by an integrated network of bioelectric fields.
Reductive physicalism paints a picture of life as arising from the genetically programmed assembly of molecular primitives through an unguided physical process. But is that all there really is?
Michael Levin’s lab studies cellular development and regeneration in various species. Through their research, they found that the specific arrangement of organs and tissues in an organism isn’t dictated exclusively by its genes. They extensively studied the planarian — a humble flatworm with extraordinary regenerative abilities.
You’ve probably heard of the lizard that can regrow its tail. But when a planarian is cut in two, each half grows into a whole new planarian. Researchers found that by cutting a piece of the planarian and inducing changes to the bioelectric potential across its membranes during the regeneration process, they were able to grow a two-headed planarian.
Now, something even more interesting happens when we cut off a piece of this two-headed planarian. Even without any external intervention, this piece grows into another two-headed planarian. It’s almost as if the bioelectric stimulus imprinted a memory onto the collective of cells. And no genes were edited here!
In another experiment, researchers mutated the faces of tadpoles to create malformed “Picasso tadpoles”. If each cell simply followed a predetermined genetic blueprint during development, one would expect the frogs they evolved into to be deformed as well.
But surprisingly, in most cases, they went on to produce rather normal-looking frogs. Somehow, the cells were able to actively respond to the perturbation and coordinate their individual actions to achieve the desired configuration.
It would appear that the organism as an integrated whole possesses a high-level understanding of the target morphology that isn’t reducible to the product of simple rule-following by its component parts. It’s also striking how much the behavior of cells during development mirrors the workings of our own minds.
Exhibiting characteristics like memory, an understanding of goal states, and adaptation to changes in the environment. This leads you to wonder if these cells can actually think.
A potent mix of reductive and anthropocentric views leads to the popular myth that there’s something unique about the structure of our brains that grants us the ability to think. But it would appear that these capabilities may be more widespread than our fragile egos would like to admit.
Research in the field of basal cognition shows that even the behavior of so-called “lower organisms” like bacteria can be understood through a cognitive framework. Escherichia coli is a common bacteria that lives in our gut. In our intestinal tract, the sugar lactose precedes maltose.
Researchers found that the bacteria have learned to exploit this by activating their maltose pathways when they detect the presence of lactose. The crucial question is whether this behavior is adaptive or a mere physical fact of the chemical process.
And by conditioning a culture of this bacteria to grow in an environment with just lactose and no maltose, they found that it loses its maltose-anticipatory reaction to lactose. How Pavlovian! Certain bacteria, like Myxococcus xanthus, can perceive inert foreign objects like glass beads — which cannot be explained by a simple sensitivity to chemical gradients — and exhibit tactic behavior towards those objects.
They also demonstrate the ability to move, self-organize into multicellular swarms, and even prey on other species of bacteria. It appears that life down below is no less interesting than life up above. Experiments have also shown cognitive characteristics apparent in the behavior of diverse living organisms such as plants and fungi. It seems that life everywhere, when observed closely appears to think.
Taking it a step further, if we accept that all these organisms possess some capacity to think, it’s not hard to imagine that they also have a kind of subjective conscious experience
They also have a kind of subjective conscious experience — that there is something it is like to be them. This raises a couple of interesting points to explore. First, the idea that mental idioms can be applied to the behavior of various lifeforms.
Rather than shackling ourselves to describing all phenomena in contrived material formalisms, we are free to use notions that we are more intimately familiar with — like wanting, planning, learning.
Another point to consider is that subjective consciousness may be scale-invariant. And all beings, regardless of their place in our constructed hierarchies, are treated the same. The physicalist paradigm often treats consciousness as a property that mysteriously emerges from material interactions above a particular size or level of complexity.
And the discontinuity in the process of physical evolution that suddenly makes a system conscious always seemed a little arbitrary and capricious to me. An implicit assumption of the physicalist worldview is that consciousness is a one-way product of physical structure.
But what if it played a fundamental role in creating the structure in the first place? As the studies in morphology have shown, characteristics of consciousness appear to manifest even during the process of development.
This challenges the simplistic notion of a unidirectional relationship between the structure physical matter and consciousness. These points strike at the very heart of the notion of a physical basis for consciousness.
Now, some may still try to rescue physicalism by arguing that we only need to adjust the scale of our investigation and look for a more subtle physical mechanism underlying consciousness in living beings.
But there may be something fundamentally irreconcilable about applying the principles of physical reduction to explain subjective conscious experience. The philosopher Thomas Nagel explores this point in his famous essay, “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?”
We appear to be faced with a general difficulty about psychophysical reduction. In other areas the process of reduction is a move in the direction of greater objectivity, toward a more accurate view of the real nature of things. Experience itself, however, does not seem to fit the pattern.
[…] If the subjective character of experience is fully comprehensible only from one point of view, then any shift to greater objectivity — that is, less attachment to a specific viewpoint — does not take us nearer to the real nature of the phenomenon: it takes us farther away from it.
Subjective consciousness underlies how we experience things in every moment, while the notion of an objective physical realm is just another abstraction in our experience. Not to say that each of these perspectives doesn’t have its own place.
But if I had to pick one that I believed lay at the foundation of all lifeforms, I would choose the one that is forever immediately apparent. At the very tip of the Statue of Liberty, defining the highest point on Lady Liberty’s torch, sits a single atom of gold. Why is it there?
A bit more information. Every question expresses uncertainty. To resolve uncertainty is to acquire information. Information, in this sense, is quantifiable. The amount of information needed to answer a question counts all the possible answers in the following way.
Every time we eliminate half of the potential answers, we have acquired a bit of information. Big questions are broken up into smaller, easier questions. We narrow down the answer by asking successive yes-or-no questions, receiving one bit at a time.
Eventually, we will have acquired enough bits to answer the question — we’ll have information. But where does this information reside — where is it stored? On the one hand, information is abstract. It doesn’t matter if it is instantiated in the world or not — the answer to 1+1 just is, regardless of whether it is etched in stone, ink, or the synapses of a brain.
Yet, as the late pioneering information theorist Rolf Landauer said, information is physical. To store, process, or transmit information requires doing something in the real world, with physical stuff — the purview of physics.
Indeed, we cannot possess information except by extracting it from the real world — we get bits from its. So now we are in the realm of physics, and any semblance of a question having a scientific flavor inevitably leads down the road of reductionism. We are told that chemistry is just applied physics, which is more fundamental.
Since molecules are made of atoms, the rules obeyed by atoms must explain the existence of molecules. But atoms are made of protons, neutrons, and electrons — so we don’t need the concept of atoms at all, according to reductionism.
And down we go until we eventually get to a world governed entirely by the laws of fundamental particles. The gold atom is there because the fundamental forces demand it. The laws of physics require it to be placed exactly where it is.
All the details of that atom and how its properties might be measured are the topics of countless Ph.D. theses in physics departments around the world. We can figure out in excruciating detail — using more mathematics and jargon than anyone would care to see — anything that can be measured about that gold atom.
Any information that a gold atom might contain is encoded in itself and its placement within the arrangement of atoms around it. This is physicalism in a nutshell — there is nothing above and beyond what is contained in the material world. If information exists, it must be contained in real things.
Yet, we will never be able to answer the original question — why is that gold atom there instead of still buried in the ground — starting from the fundamental forces it experiences.
Inherent in most discussions of physicalism is the idea that we — scientists, explorers, engineers, or just simply observers — passively discover information encoded in the real world by probing it with the ever-more-sophisticated tools of science.
Indeed, if this were true, reductionist physicalism would be ideally suited for the purpose of understanding the world. But we don’t just understand the world — we create it. Artists, engineers, and all of us to some extent mold our little corner of the universe in ways inexplicable by starting from fundamental particles.
Modern physics — general relativity and quantum mechanics — place the observer center stage. Science is about what we bring forth to our senses in the natural world — and we are equal players in this game. We push, nature pushes back — and then we say, “that was neat; let’s do it again.”
Instead of Landauer’s information is physical slogan, we could equally well say physics is informational. In other words, the laws of physics themselves are not the most fundamental things we have — they should be derived from more fundamental principles of information.
If we take this idea one step further, we end up with John Wheeler’s it from bit. Inspired by quantum physics, Wheeler proposed the participatory anthropic principle — that reality is created as we ask it questions, one bit at a time. We get it from bits.
As radical as this idea sounds, we can go even further. We don’t merely ask questions of the universe anymore — we build it. The flow of information goes both ways as we engineer structures that encode information. Because we can manipulate the world to solidify and protect that information, we can build statues that represent ideas not carried by the physical stuff making up our bodies or the statue.
And that, finally, brings us to the answer. All that glitters. What most people know is that the Statue of Liberty (officially Liberty Enlightening the World) was a gift to America from France. Of course, how it came about had more to do with politics than anything. So to understand why that gold atom is there requires knowing the motivations of 19th-century French abolitionists and the American Union.
But even then, you still would not know how the torch got there — because it’s not the original torch. The original copper torch is still viewable in a museum. It has a storied history of ill-considered modifications.
Shortly after installation, American officials had lights put inside of it and cut holes in the statue, hoping it would shine. It didn’t work. Why replace the torch in 1986, and why gold? Again, the answers to these questions come down to theories of physiology, sociology, politics, and economics.
So, to understand why it was eventually replaced with the current gold torch requires the concept of ineptitude, which fundamental particles are obviously ignorant of. One hundred years after its installation, the torch was replaced.
First, centennials — though irrelevant from a cosmic perspective — have meaning to modern humans. A hundred-year anniversary is a good opportunity to justify spending money to coat a copper statue in 24-karat gold, for example.
Of course, gold has physically interesting properties, including the ability to “glisten” when illuminated with light. But why should a bunch of slightly evolved apes care about shiny things? Shiny things, like gold, are valuable — but that is also a cultural construct.
We can go on listing innumerable historical facts about the Statue of Liberty and the physical and chemical properties of gold, but we will always be missing something — there is no end to “but, why?” questions.
Each answer to why foliates into more questions until we are all but obligated to play out the entire history of the universe to replicate in every minute detail the answer to a question no one has ever actually asked or cares about.
The truth is, there is no truth about that gold atom. There are only stories. And whether or not a story is good depends on the desires of who wants to hear it. Since I’m taking on spiritual mentees and forcing them to meditate (or else!), I’d be a bit of a hypocrite if I didn’t have a serious practice myself. And so, I’ve gradually got myself up to 30 minute sessions.
And a strange thing is happening — I’m quite adept at paying attention to the Ins and Outs of the breath, to the point where gaining “access concentration”, or pure absorption in the object of attention, is getting easy. And this is where the fun starts!
First off, my body becomes so relaxed that involuntary movements become quite common. I start to shake my head back and forth, and the energy in my body gets transferred all around, from my head, to my torso, to my legs. While this is all happening, I’m still paying attention to the breath, which might sound nearly impossible since a spasming body that you have no control of is a…bit out of the ordinary.
So, the weirdo movements slow down, and this is where the first stage of Jhana happens. You’re probably lost at this point, so let’s back up a second. The Jhanas are included as part of the Buddhist “path to enlightenment.” They are incredible states of being outside the norm, and there are four of them.
Ok, so, first Jhana happens and my body explodes with bursts of energy, like the rapture exploded out of a cannon. The energy typically subsides, but keeps coming back in waves. It’s a bit exhausting to be honest, so it’s a good thing one can move into the second Jhana.
Which, when described by Leigh Brasington, a Jhana master, is the feeling of getting well wishes on your birthday. It’s that satisfied feeling of happiness, which feels like a relief after the intensity of all of that rapture and ecstasy.
Eventually, second Jhana makes way for third, where even the sensation of happiness goes away and straight up equanimity occurs. I get here and I’m like…ok, what a journey.
Happy to arrive at my destination! It’s like looking at a clear lake with no waves, except you’re the lake. Yeah, I know, I can’t describe third Jhana very well, but all sensations kinda dissipate and you’re left with nothing but pure old awareness.
You’d think that’s the end, but nope! One more! Fourth Jhana comes and essentially “takes you to the bottom of the well.” Consciousness fades into a sense that your sinking to the bottom, but instead of their being s bottom to land on there’s nothing.
Fourth Jhana is kind of messing with my head, because I don’t think humans are meant to stare at nothing. It’s a state of pure being, so far outside of normal human consciousness that y’all probably think I’m making this shit up.
But I’ve landed there two days in a row and I think I’ll spend some time trying to figure out what this nothingness is all about. So yeah. Meditation can do this to you. And no, I’m not taking drugs. Just staring at the breath for a little while. If any of y’all have experienced states like this, let me know.
I’d love to chat with you because to be frank it feels quite lonely to go on this journey and have basically no one know what the hell you’re talking about. Hey there rebel! Today I want to talk about something I’ve been preoccupied with for most of my life with — time. When you’re obsessed with time, you account for every second.
You account for the time you’re spending on somebody else’s paycheck; the time you waste in binge-watching guilty-pleasure series; the time it takes you to create or get to creating something because you’re a procrastinator.
Basically, every second is a glare that blinds you to the moments you can actually enjoy and turn into something worth having. Because when you’re preoccupied with time, you spend a lot of it waiting. Here’s the thing: You’re waiting for a day that will never come.
Waiting for the day when you have more than enough time to pursue your dreams; waiting for the day when all the odds are in your favor; waiting for the day when your responsibilities melt away and you are a free man/woman; waiting for the day when you finally feel ready.
I don’t want to disillusion you or say no to your dreams. On the contrary; I want to wake you from this constant state of waiting. And I want you to see that you can do ANYTHING at ANY TIME, whatever anyone else — or your conscience — might say. Wining you lies the power of CHANGE.
But as any other power, you have to activate it yourself. Not wait for permission. Or for a day when you are forced to move your a** and make the change. Most of us secretly wish that something will happen to make things different, but it’s up to YOU to make things happen.
Let’s take an inventory of all the times I’ve waited in my life: When I was a teen, I waited to wake up different and popular. When I was in University, I waited for the day I would stop procrastinating. When I was in Uni still, I waited for “the perfect story” to start writing. When I was in my early 20’s, I waited to have more money to travel.
When I fell into a quarter-life crisis, I waited for the day when I would finally figure out a way to balance my passions and my work, but I had to finally stop waiting, and create my own new reality, and that was the single hardest thing I have ever done, and the best. When I talk to my clients, I keep hearing the same objections over and over — I have too little time, I don’t have enough money to do that.
It’s too hard, I don’t feel motivated, I have too many responsibilities to start my own business on the side, and these objections could PARALYZE anyone.I hope you don’t know what it feels like to be truly helpless, to be literally paralyzed. Luckily, I only know the feeling indirectly, though my dreams.
I have had that dream many times — being unable to move my body and relying on others to move me from place to place or suddenly falling rigid on the ground — usually in a bathroom somewhere.
Not being able to move (metaphorically) is a terrifying feeling, and it could easily become the way you see your life on a spiritual and emotional level. In Psychology, we call it “learned helplessness”. It’s a condition where you’re unaware that you have a choice in a certain situation or moment, and it’s always a lie.
You always have a choice, whether you believe it or not. Today you have a choice between: WAITING and STARTING YOUR DREAM. And don’t even get me started on “personality problems” because I’m the queen of procrastination and multipassionate distraction and moods that are all over the place.
I know more about not having control over your own mind and life than you will ever know. Yet, I fight every day to get there; wherever “there” is. :) But you need help. The help of tools.
Today I am proud to announce that despite my natural inclination to leave things unfinished, I finish everything I start, even the big things.I am also proud to say that I am managing my moods on a daily basis, which means I can do more work consistently than any other time in my life.
And finally, I’m not lost between my many passions anymore because I have a brand that evolves as I do in time. I officially won this round, Mother Nature. Which goes to show — whoever you are, whatever you do, you can change and you can be better.
Methods. Coaching. Whatever it takes to get you from where you are now to where you want to be soon. Finally, believe me — or better yet, believe yourself — that you can get anywhere if you’d only make the right choice right now. See, everything is a habit — writing, working, waiting, etc.
Choose the right habit, believe you have the discipline to carry it through (or get help here), and open your life to the endless possibilities of success and personal growth and fulfillment. I know you can do it. And I know you know it, too. What about you? What have you been waiting for? Can you stop waiting and start whatever you’re aching for today? Drop a comment below. :)
I was nervous as I sat down in the chair at the center of the room in the doctor’s office. The doctor and his assistant mumbled to each other in front of their computers, tapping keys and pointing at symbols on the screen. I just sat there in the chair, quietly fidgeting as I waited for them to start.
The doctor placed a cap over my head, fastening the straps snugly under my neck. The cap was made of black fabric with circular electrodes that tightly covered my entire scalp. The doctor disappeared, then reappeared moments later with a syringe filled with a clear liquid.
I looked nervously at it, but he just gently put the tip of the syringe to one of the electrodes on my head and injected a small amount of liquid onto it. I winced as the cold gel came into contact with my skin.
The doctor explained, “This is electrode gel. It’ll make your head more conductive, and it’ll make it easier for us to see your brainwaves.” I nodded a little bit. The doctor fiddled with his computer, then a short while later, the big screen in front of me lit up with a graph showing my brainwaves.
Numbers flashing and rapidly changing, waves fluctuating and blinking at me; it was almost overwhelming how much information was being presented on the screen. And it all came from my brain. A couple of hours ago, I couldn’t have imagined that I would participate in something that seemed so futuristic.
Magical devices that could read brainwaves just using electrodes seemed to be the stuff of science fiction. But there I was, sitting in the doctor’s chair and staring at my brainwaves being projected onto the very screen in front of me.
An EEG (electroencephalogram) is a test that detects any abnormal electrical activity in your brain. This is done using small electrodes that are placed upon your scalp. These electrodes detect electrical charges from the your braincell activity, and show where the activity originates from. Then, these electrical charges are amplified to appear on a computer screen.
These electrical charges appear as waves which vary in amplitude and frequency depending on the strength and the type of brainwaves. Different common types of brainwaves include: - Delta Waves: slow brainwaves involved in the deepest phase of sleep and deep meditation. Delta waves are present in the period of sleep that is the most restorative and rejuvenating.
- Theta Waves: This is a type of brainwave that is also common in sleep. This kind of brainwave is associated with the period right before you fall asleep, that time when memories flash through your brain disjointedly. - Alpha Waves: Alpha waves are related to periods of calm. These waves are present during restful, nonactive events.
- Beta Waves: Beta waves are present when we are focused on an activity. They’re present when we use our critical thinking, judgement, and decision-making skills. - Gamma Waves: These waves are the highest frequency. They are related to processes that involve processing information from many different sources at the same time.
EEGs can be used to diagnose a variety of conditions such as epilepsy, Alzheimer’s disease, and narcolepsy. Since all of these disorders appear as unusual brainwave activity, the EEG can detect and evaluate them. It’s pretty straightforward!
The procedure usually takes from 20 minutes to an hour, and it’s non-invasive. There aren’t usually any side effects (although in some rare cases the rapidly dimming and brightening lights can cause a seizure), and the only minor side effect is having electrode gel stuck in your hair.
In my case, I wasn’t using an EEG to treat any specific disorder. The doctor wanted to test out a new software that could improve your focus. I opted to try it out since I wanted to see if there were any visible results by the end of it.
The software that the doctor created used artificial intelligence to take the brainwaves of the subject and detect whether they were in the acceptable range or not.
Since being focused involves activity in the prefrontal cortex, the program could take the brainwaves from the EEG node on the prefrontal cortex and analyze them. If the waves were in the acceptable form (which meant that the subject was sufficiently focused), then the program would reward the subject.
This was usually done by placing a dimmer on the subject’s screen while they watched a video. Every time the subject performed poorly; the screen would dim so that it was hard to see the display. And in reverse, when the subject performed well, they would be rewarded with a brighter screen.
The first time that I tried it, I didn’t notice any visible change by the end. I was slightly annoyed because of how the screen kept dimming and brightening, seemingly out of my control.
No matter how hard I tried, it felt like the computer wasn’t listening to me. However, the doctor said that this was normal. I shouldn’t be actively trying to change my brainwaves. The program would teach my brain to follow the right directions, instead of teaching me.
After several sessions, I began to feel a difference. It was small, admittedly, but after every session, I would finish feeling more alert and awake than I did beforehand.
It was as if the program had cleared my brain. I also found that before my studying sessions, I would feel more conscious and ready to learn than I did before trying the EEG treatment.It was kind of scary how much the EEG ended up affecting me.
For me, even as someone who doesn’t struggle with a neurological disorder, the EEG managed to create a detectable change in my brain activity. This technology has a lot of promise.
EEG is already being tested as a treatment method for common mental illnesses such as anxiety and depression. It’s possible that this could mean a new revolutionary method of treatment for mental illnesses. It’s hard to emphasize the potential that this technology has.
Inside us, there’s a universal conscious space. Actually there’s really no ‘inside’ and ‘outside’ to a human being. Consciousness exists in the space around us as well as the space inside us.
There’s one seamless conscious space across the Universe experiencing life inside all living beings everywhere.
Something in the Universe, a conscious space and silence words can’t describe, is experiencing life inside all of us. A spacious consciousness as large as the Universe is knowing what it is to be human.And our inner core is somehow woven into this consciousness throughout the Universe.
The awareness we know inside ourselves, the conscious seeing and knowing prior to thought, is a cosmic consciousness that includes all of us within itself. We can tune in to this cosmic field. We can train ourselves to take a focus of attention into the conscious space and silence inside us regularly during the day, so we can bring more clarity and depth of awareness into our life.
And improve our access to the intuition that brings insight and inspiration and help with our everyday problems and issues. The gentle conscious silence that holds every star, and all of us, is gazing through the core of our being as moments pass, helping us know what words can never say.
It’s there inside us, a constant presence, through all the endless changes in our life. A conscious silence as large as the Universe reminds us we’re cosmic, the Universe in human form. And we’re never separate from this conscious space. When we’re born, the Universe becomes a human being.
And while we live, an inexpressible spatial intelligence throughout the Universe is transforming cosmic energy into the biochemistry of our body. A field of cosmic intelligence is vibrationally altering the energy fabric of itself to make itself visible, touchable and knowable as all of us and all life everywhere. Transforming itself into the clusters of energy fluctuations that appear to us as the living beings of our world.
While several trillion complex biochemical reactions, all in precise sync with one another, are occurring throughout our human body, coherent neural processing, within trillions of synapses in our brain, is generating the visual, aural and tactile impression of a three-dimensional world around us.
And it’s now time, in 2021, to recognize that consciousness is the primary element in the Universe not matter. An immersive, self-aware, cosmic consciousness is expressing itself as all life in the Universe and experiencing being alive.
Conscious awareness is an attribute of this universal field of consciousness, not an activity of the separate brain of living beings. Let’s remember that the worldview placing cosmic consciousness at the heart of the Universe isn’t anything new.
Many wisdom traditions through the centuries have created their own names and descriptions for the conscious space and silence inside us that seems to extend everywhere throughout the Universe and include all of us.
And a simple daily mindfulness practice helps us dissolve our sense of separation from the world and each other, and our usual and conventional view of reality, bringing insight and inspiration.
Helping us also realize we’re participants in a conscious and intelligent Universe, generating, encouraging, and maintaining life throughout itself. We’re the spacious consciousness as large as the Universe, that knows what it is to be human.
“You’re the realest motherfucker on here,” is a comment I get a lot. I’m guessing it’s because of my writing voice, since y’all don’t know me from Adam on the streets, or in the office, or at the bar. (Most of you, anyway. Some of you have had the displeasure of meeting me in real life.)
It’s worth unpacking what it means to be “real,” because, inevitably, it’s something we value in most people — or, more accurately, it’s the opposite of “fake,” which is something we tend to not value in people.
But what does “real” really mean? (Great fucking sentence, john. Really.) How do you become the “realest motherfucker on here?” And is that necessarily a good thing? We’ll find out together, but first, let’s break down what real is not: Brutal Honesty
Is your friend’s art-rock project overwrought, derivative and boring AF? Does your kid bake you brownies that taste like cocoa-flavored cement? Does your boyfriend treat oral sex like open-heart surgery? I ache for you. That said, don’t tell them literally those things — not even with the qualifying follow-up of, “I’m just being real with you.” No. You’re being a dick.
Also, those of you framing life lessons as “brutal truths” in headlines for clicks? I see you. That ain’t real, either, and nor are they brutal truths. They’re just fresh frames for the same lenses, through which you spit the same tired-ass words everyone’s read dozens of times.
You know those motherfuckers in the bar who yell and curse out the bartender when the service is slow? Or the ones who are quick to quip that you look “tired?” Or ask you, “How many Muppets died in the making of that jacket?” (Okay, that last one is kinda funny.)
The ones who ghost you on Friday because better plans with someone more likely to not treat oral sex like open heart surgery came along? Also not real. That’s just being tactless.
“Be yourself” is some of the worst advice on planet Earth, because a lot of “selves” are just run-of-the-mill assholes, or kleptocratic authoritarian assholes, or totalitarian genocidal assholes, or just the most left-swipe-able asshole on Earth. There again, although they stayed true to their beliefs, asshole beliefs are at best delusional and at worst pure evil. Not real.
Alright, now that we’ve cycled through some things that real is not, let’s talk about what real is. These are not brutal truths everyone needs to hear before they’re 30 (you need to hear these), these are just common sense things framed in a way that you haven’t read them before.
So strap yourself in, and let’s find out what happens when people stop being polite, and start being real … mad real. You know what’s real? The truth — and the people who seek it. I don’t mean, like, your life experiences. I don’t mean your anecdotes.
I don’t mean inferring causation when only correlation is evident. I don’t mean the kind of truth where you can bust through the wall like the Kool-Aid man with a “WELL ACTUALLY.” I mean truth with a capital T. (Spelled: “Truth,” not “truTh.”) The things everyone can agree upon because you can’t argue against them. They are irrefutable. They are profound. They are universal.
How do you know when it’s Capital-T versus lower-case-t? Proof. History. Trends. Data. Replication. You don’t have to be a scientist — you need to be humble, curious and empathetic, and …. aww hell I wrote that already. It’s okay to be a little bit goddamned weird. Are you into welding metallic replicas (Metallica(s)?) of Black Panther characters? Fucking awesome. Post that shit to Instagram and wear it loud and proud.
Do you have a sex swing and you’re just waiting for the “right moment” to dig it out of the attic? Guess what: There is no right moment. Hang it and tell unwitting visitors it’s your “thinking hammock.”
Me? I like to curse on the Internet and talk about recreational drug use (and sex swings). I like to dispense life advice despite being not very wealthy, not very physically fit, and on a seven-year Xanax regiment. But I’m proud of it, and I’m (mildly) good at it.
It’s as real as anything I do. That and (complete list of nerdy habits, deep breath): Play fantasy football, binge-watch Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt, Geocache, rap very poorly, and compulsively rank things. If you’re not hurting anyone, or increasing the already exhausting amount of human suffering perpetrating our planet, you do you.
If you think society will laugh at you for who you really are, don’t worry your pretty little head: People are going to laugh, but not the people you want to spend your precious few breaths on this stupid rock laughing with. You. Do. You. That’s the realest.
This is where I get serious. Yes, you can truth-seek and fly your freak flag proudly, but hear this: If you act and you don’t own up to what you do, or who you are, or take ownership of your decisions or emotions, you are not being real.
I don’t care how raw and honest you are — if you don’t stand by that raw honesty, if you don’t own the consequences of it, if you don’t act contrite when you get it wrong, and if you’re not willing to listen and have your mind changed, then guess what: You ain’t real.
You owe it to the decent humans left on this planet — both of them — to act in accordance with your values, to not try and “have it both ways,” and to not use your realness as a mask for something altogether inauthentic.
If you want to experience the highest values in life — love, compassion, beauty, creativity, joy, and higher consciousness — your brain isn’t the right place to turn. These experiences exist in your awareness, waiting to emerge.
The brain cannot give you these experiences, because contrary to popular belief, the brain isn’t aware. It transmits thoughts the way a television transmits pictures on the screen. No one would say that TVs produce the shows they transmit, yet we say this about the brain all the time.
It is pure illusion to mistake the brain for the mind. The basic chemicals in a brain cell are the same as in the skin cells of your big toe, and the functioning of brain cells differs very little from the functions of every other cell in the body.
A three-pound lump of gray matter cannot escape its status as a batch of chemicals, and we mustn’t attribute love, compassion creativity, etc. to a batch of chemicals, either. In fact, the brain isn’t even aware that it exists. Until the skull is opened to reveal it, there is no subjective experience that says, “Here I am. I am your brain.”
The shortest route to the truth is to throw out illusions. This is the path taken by the great spiritual traditions, even though Buddha, Christ, and the ancient seers of India never used the word “brain.” But they understood that Maya, the all-encompassing illusion that masks reality, was a scheme of magical lies.
This is a good starting point, because clearly the brain is constantly weaving a net of magical lies — there are no sights and sounds inside the mushy-watery darkness of the brain, and yet somehow the full-blown image of the world is projected there.
You can verify that what you see and hear actually exists simply by experiencing it. That’s not where the lie is found. The lie is found in the belief that Maya is the only reality, that nothing beyond the evidence of the five senses can be real. Basing your life upon what you see, hear, taste, smell, and touch is the same as giving in to magical lies. Likewise, limiting reality to brain stuff is the same as giving in to Maya.
The only way to escape magical lies is by placing consciousness as the sole creative force behind everything. Consciousness transforms itself into thoughts and sensations at one level, into matter and energy at another level, and delivers the highest values in existence at another level.
Proving that this kind of all-embracing consciousness exists (call it God or the gods, buddha mind, Brahman) has vexed humanity for centuries, yet we can cut through all the confusion and conflict quite simply. The proof that consciousness underlies everything comes down to one thing: Knowing. Nature knows what it is doing, but if Nature were only random events that shuffle matter and energy around, it would know nothing and existence would be meaningless.
Yet every cell in our body knows how to sustain itself by organizing hundreds of thousands of chemical reactions per second. A cell isn’t a bag of proteins suspended in a watery soup. It is organized intelligence. Every living thing is organized intelligence, and there is no reason to claim that this intelligence didn’t precede life on Earth. The entire cosmos leading up to life on Earth is a sequence of creative intelligence.
Now arises the big question. Did this creative intelligence evolve into Homo sapiens and our huge higher brain simply to bury us in magical lies? If you examine the lives of the vast majority of people, the answer is yes. Going about your day is a systematic way to navigate Maya. You accept the magical lies, do the best you can with them, and never see beyond the illusion.
But there is another way, which was discovered by a motley crew of sages, saints, and enlightened people who shared the same small, modest, and seemingly insignificant experience. They experienced the self. In the midst of the endless changes in the world, the swirling activity of the mind, and the constant challenges of daily life, one thing never changes. A silent sense of self persists.
It wasn’t the ego self, which is a creature of Maya and is constantly running after its next desire. It wasn’t the mental self, which is preoccupied with the never-ending story of its thoughts. No matter how confusing or complicated life becomes, your sense of self isn’t altered. What sets apart the world’s sages, saints, and the enlightened is that they saw a tremendous possibility no one else grasped.
If this tiny, modest sense of self stands apart from all pain and suffering, confusion, and conflict, maybe we should identify with it. At the very least we should go inside and meet ourselves, because until you confront your sense of self, you only know a false, transient “I.”
The brain can’t show you who you are. It is one thing for a magician to pull a rabbit out of a hat. But a rabbit can’t pull itself out of the hat. Nor can be brain explain itself. Once you meet yourself, many things change. Here are the most important.
You find peace and quiet undisturbed by outside events. You begin to know things spontaneously. The truth reveals itself as wisdom. You become detached from pain and suffering, and this in turn makes pain and suffering diminish and finally vanish.
You no longer have only brief flashes and glimpses of love, compassion, creativity, and other higher experiences — they are now constantly available to you. You see through Maya as an illusion. All physical objects are illusory, because they are only experiences in consciousness. The brain itself is part of the illusion.
You realize that the creative intelligence that is behind everything is actually you, not the you of everyday life but a self that is pure being, pure intelligence, pure awareness. I’ve only offered a thumbnail sketch of how to escape the magical lies that the brain specializes in, and many will greet some of my presentation with skepticism. But really there’s only one takeaway that matters.
It is the knowledge that you are not condemned to be a prisoner of magical lies. In that realization is the beginning of the path to freedom, bliss, and infinite possibilities. Have you ever learnt a new word and then suddenly you see that word everywhere? Or someone told you about a kind of car they love, and you’re now seeing them everywhere you drive? It’s not a coincidence, it’s the energy you’ve used thinking about that word, visualizing it and making it a reality.
Same applies to manifestation. As author, trainer and speaker, Michael Losier puts it, “I attract into my life whatever I give my attention, energy, and focus to, whether positive or negative.” So, Aluxers, let’s see what positive things we should manifest into our lives. Welcome to Alux — the place where future billionaires come to get inspired. If you’ve not followed yet, you’re missing out. With that out of the way, let’s move on with the article. 01 — A Phone Call or Text. If you’re new to manifesting — start off small.
Think about who you’d like to hear from. Is there a friend that you might have lost touch with, or a romantic interest that you’ve been afraid to message? The process is simple. Think about that person, imagine them calling you and then visualize how their call will affect you and how you will feel once the call is over.
The trick that many forget, is to manifest the feeling of having completed the manifestation. So, you go about living your life as if what you’ve manifested is a reality, then you let it go out into the universe, and let the universe do the rest.
We do have an unending need to keep chasing happiness. To keep going after the next item, person, feeling, to give us that fleeting moment of happiness. Or we ramble on about how we’ll be happier when we get the girl, the baby, the car or the promotion. It doesn’t work that way, though, does it?
So, while manifesting happiness seems a tad contrary, use this manifestation time to be grateful for what you already have and know, and find joy in the mundane and simplicity of life. You’ll pass that onto others, and create a ripple effect of happiness, even through the hard. 03 — New Ways of Earning Money. Right, so we completely understand that it’s really challenging to find all this happiness when our brain is so focused on money — or rather lack thereof.
So, use that quiet time to think about different ways of earning money. You’ve surely had one or two incredible ideas but are just too afraid to act on them. Fear of failure, embarrassment, or just not enough knowledge are all major factors in disabling people from making new money moves.
Manifest and visualize yourself putting the right steps in motion, and then start following up those images with baby steps. As Abraham Hicks said, “Action that is inspired from aligned thoughts is joyful action.”
04 — Confidence. Have you ever wished that you could walk into a room and never have any self-doubt? Or meeting strangers didn’t fill you with anxiety? Or perhaps you just wished you could know your own self-worth? Confidence can get knocked so quickly, and it takes a long time to repair and get back.
Start the journey to gaining your confidence back by manifesting and visualizing yourself owning it. Aluxers, be aware though that along with manifestation, you still need to put the steps in place to make those dreams a reality.
You won’t be able to just sit on your bed everyday dreaming about money and expect money to magically appear in your bank account. You still need to go out and put the hard work in, but back it up with the manifestation to put out the right energy.
05 — Strong Mental Thoughts. A strong mind is something that will take you far in life. Our thoughts are a huge “make or break” factor in our lives, as they become our reality. Forbes affirms that “Your thoughts are a catalyst for self-perpetuating cycles,” and they’re correct. So, how do we ensure that the self-perpetuating cycles are positive and not negative?
Simple — by manifesting a strong mind, remaining in control of your thoughts, and maintaining a positive mind-set. Don’t fret when negativity does creep in — thoughts are just thoughts — and you are in control of them.
06 — Travel and Experience. We’ve been locked down for ages and are finally emerging from traveling to the grocery store to traveling internationally. Manifesting a trip might seem a bit silly, because you know what your bank account looks like — but that’s not how it works.
When you manifest, you’re opening up your mind, heart and body to a new experience. You’re telling the universe that travel is what you need, and the universe will provide. It may not come gift-wrapped as a 5-star cruise, but may be an opportunity that you never thought of before.
You could find yourself teaching in Thailand or rescuing turtles in Greece. Just manifest with intent, follow it up with visualization, affirmation, patience and don’t let doubt or fear creep in. 07 — Better Health. An article for Science Focus confirmed that new research is… “discovering that the way you think about life can fend off infection, help you live longer and even spare you from the surgeon’s knife.”
Dr Laura Kubzansky, co-director of the Centre for Health and Happiness at Harvard School of Public Health, is a top researcher on how our thoughts are directly linked to our health. She says that “people with higher levels of positive emotions do a better job of managing stress.”
Furthermore, a study done in 2003 had 300 volunteers infected with the common cold. Over 5 days, each volunteer was monitored, and the results were conclusive. Those with the most positive outlook on life were 3 times less likely to develop any symptoms compared to those who were less happy.
Thinking, visualizing, and manifesting your way to better health is something that may take practice, but is certainly worth it. If you are concerned about your health, check out: 15 Health Mistakes You Don’t Know You’re Making. So You Think You Know Facts About Health? This Article Is Going to Bring You to Challenge Yourself.
08 — Fulfilling Relationships. And we’re not just referring to romantic relationships — we’re meaning with friends, family and even the cashier at the grocery store. It’s time to manifest ways of being more real with others. Instead of the usual, “How are you?” “I’m fine” reply — take the time to really understand if that person is fine or it might be you that’s not “fine.”
To create meaningful relationships with others, we’ve got to work on ourselves. We’ve got to learn to respect our own boundaries, so that others will too. We need to put out energy that exudes who we want to become — calm, kind, peaceful, a safe haven and beacon of love.
And with time, you will start attracting people with similar mindsets and securing beautiful, meaningful relationships. 09 — Ability to Retain Knowledge. This has a lot to do with being mindful. How often do you meet someone and within seconds, you can’t remember their name? Or put something down, and can’t remember where you left it?
And those are the small things. Have you read an interesting article, but just can’t seem to recall the details to share what you’ve read? Our brains can be trained to be more mindful. It takes time and patience, but as explained by mindful.org,
“Mindfulness is the basic human ability to be fully present, aware of where we are and what we’re doing, and not overly reactive or overwhelmed by what’s going on around us.” Visualize yourself absorbing information and in time, you will Aluxers.
10 — Peaceful Sleep. Not only can you manifest a restful sleep, you can also manifest while sleeping. If you’re keen to really delve into this topic, we recommend any of Esther Hick’s books — which are all available or download on Audible. Some titles include “Ask and it is given,” Money and the law of attraction,” and “The Law of Attraction Essential Collection.”
During your daily manifesting routine, just make sure you allow a minute or two to manifest a good rest at night, because you’ll need it when everything you’ve been manifesting starts becoming a reality! This morning I had a bowl of plain Greek yoghurt and toasted muesli for breakfast. I could have had a plain bagel with mashed avocado — or, I could have had nothing at all.
But I had the yoghurt and muesli. I know, I know, damn millennials and their hipster breakfast food. But, also, who cares what I ate for breakfast? Well, perhaps the universe does. Imagine that, after breakfast, I dutifully went to the lab to perform some quantum physics experiments. The results of the experiments obviously depend on what I do in the lab. But, they shouldn’t depend on what happens outside of the lab, right?
I mean, why should laser light bouncing around through crystals and mirrors care what the current value of the S&P 500 is, let alone what I had for breakfast?
The conditions under which an experiment is performed are called its context. In practice, the contexts we consider are very limited to a few settings on the devices in the lab. But, maybe the temperature of the room is important. Were the lights on? Was the door open? Especially when things go wrong — which is more often than not — the context is where you look for answers.
But some parts of the context are so far removed from the experiment that there is absolutely no way they could affect the results, such as that delicious muesli. (Did I mention it was toasted with a hint of maple and paired with a pot set Greek yoghurt?)
A theory is a set of mathematical rules that make predictions about the outcomes of experiments. Most theories automatically rule out most contexts simply by ignoring them. Dependence on other contexts are ruled out by experimentation.
If there is no possible experimental arrangement in the lab that can distinguish what I had for breakfast, then the theory shouldn’t make reference to that context. Think of it as an application of Occam’s razor. Indeed, quantum physics makes no mention of breakfast choices.
As successful as quantum physics is, it is merely an operational theory. It’s like a lab manual with instructions about the preparations and expectations of experiments. It’s remarkably accurate, allowing us to engineer materials and devices which form the basis of all modern technology. But, it doesn’t tell us anything about reality — and that bothers a lot of physicists.
The Treachery of Images (This is Not a Pipe) by Rene Magritte. Do we see the world “as it is?” What is reality? Nope. There’s no way we are going through that philosophical minefield.
Let’s focus instead on scientific realism, the idea that a world of things exists independent of the minds that might perceive it and it is the world slowly revealed by progress in science.
Scientific realism is the belief that the true nature of reality is the subject of scientific investigation and while we may not completely understand it at any given moment, each experiment gets us a little bit closer. This is a popular philosophical position among scientists and science enthusiasts.
A typical scientific realist might believe, for example, that fundamental particles exist even though we cannot perceive them directly with our senses. Particles are real and their properties — whatever they may be — form part of the state of the world.
A slightly more extreme view is that this state of the world can be specified with mathematical quantities and these, in turn, obey equations we call physical laws. In this view, the ultimate goal of science is to discover these laws. So what are the consequences of quantum physics on these views?
As I mentioned above, quantum physics is not a realistic model of the world — that is, it does not specify quantities for states of the world. An obvious question is then can we supplement or otherwise replace quantum physics with a deeper set of laws about real states of the world?
This is the question Einstein first asked with colleagues Podolski and Rosen, making headlines in 1935. The hypothetical real states of the world came to be called hidden variables since an experiment does not reveal them — at least not yet.
In the decades that followed quantum physics rapidly turned into applied science and the textbooks which became canon demonstrated only how to use the recipes of quantum physics. In textbooks that are still used today, no mention is made of the progress in the foundational aspects of quantum physics since the mathematics was cemented almost one hundred years ago.
But, in the 1960s, the most important and fundamental aspect of quantum physics was discovered and it put serious restrictions on scientific realism. Some go as far as to say the entire nature of independent reality is questionable due to it. What was discovered is now called contextuality, and its inevitability is referred to as the Bell-Kochen-Specker theorem.
John Bell is the most famous of the trio Bell, Kochen, and Specker, and is credited with proving that quantum physics contained so-called nonlocal correlations, a consequence of quantum entanglement. Feel free to read about those over here: How to think about quantum entanglement
I have two friends, Alice and Bob. Soon they will be your friends. Since I’m a nice guy, I’m going to give each of them. It was Bell’s ideas and notions that stuck and eventually led to popular quantum phenomena such as teleportation.
Nonlocality itself is wildly popular these days in science magazines with reported testing of the concept in delicately engineered experiments that span continents and sometimes involve research satellites. But nonlocality is just one type of contextuality, which is the real game in town.
In the most succinct sentence possible, contextuality is the name for the fact that any real states of the world giving rise to the rules of quantum physics must depend on contexts that no experiment can distinguish. That’s a lot to unpack.
Remember that there are lots of ways to prepare the same experiment — and by the same experiment, I mean many different experiments with completely indistinguishable results. Doing the exact same thing as yesterday in the lab, but having had a different breakfast, will give the same experimental results.
But there are things in the lab and very close to the system under investigation that don’t seem to affect the results either. An example might be mixing laser light in two different ways. There are different types of laser light that, once mixed together, are completely indistinguishable from one another no matter what experiments are performed on the mixtures.
You could spend a trillion dollars on scientific equipment and never be able to tell the two mixtures apart. Moreover, knowing only the resultant mixture — and not the way it was mixed — is sufficient to accurately predict the outcomes of any experiment performed with the light.
So, in quantum physics, the mathematical theory has a variable that refers to the mixture and not the way the mixture was made — it’s Occam’s razor in practice. Now let’s try to invent a deeper theory of reality underpinning quantum physics. Surely, if we are going to respect Occam’s razor, the states in our model should only depend on contexts with observable consequences, right?
If there is no possible experiment that can distinguish how the laser light is mixed, then the underlying state of reality should only depend on the mixture and not the context in which it was made, which, remember, might include my breakfast choices.
Alas, this is just not possible in quantum physics — it’s a mathematical impossibility in the theory and has been confirmed by many experiments. So, does this mean the universe cares about what I have for breakfast? Not necessarily. But, to believe the universe doesn’t care what I had for breakfast means you must also give up reality.
You may be inclined to believe that when you observe something in the world, you are passively looking at it just the way it would have been had you not been there. But quantum contextuality rules this out. There is no way to define a reality that is independent of the way we choose to look at it.
When people write stories about consciousness they are necessarily speaking from a position of ignorance. Very often the tales they spin put consciousness in the starring role — the most important part of cognition, perhaps the very thing that makes life worthwhile at all, the apex of creation. But in a very real sense these stories are written by consciousness itself. Left to its own devices it gets a little self-aggrandizing.
We need to leave the unreliable narrator behind and explore the purpose and value of consciousness without relying so much on the fables that introspection whispers in our internal ears. We need to look at ourselves from outside.
Consciousness is an aspect of the operation of the human brain. The brain is an organ, and therefore evolved to promote survival of the whole organism. The human brain — like all brains — is responsible for taking sensory inputs and converting them into motor outputs.
Brains perceive the environment and act in response to it, and everything from avoiding pain to having a philosophical discussion over wine is basically the same — sensory nerves as input and muscle contractions as output. If consciousness has a purpose it’s going to fit somewhere into that story.
It seems like perception is likely to be part of the purpose of consciousness (if it has a purpose at all). Consciousness is often defined as something like “perception of our own perception”, but I think this recursive compounding may be too clever by half.
Perhaps “awareness” itself is a concept sufficiently close to the meaning of consciousness that we don’t need anything more complex. However, awareness alone isn’t exactly the same as consciousness because it’s still possible for the brain to be aware of its environment — in the sense of being able to react to it — but not be conscious of it.
Blindsight is a condition where a subject reports that they are blind, and yet we observe them reacting to visual stimuli such as avoiding obstacles or moving out of the way of thrown objects. They are subjectively blind, but objectively sighted.
It seems like what’s happening here is that the brain is shunting visual information directly into action, and never bothering to bring conscious awareness into the loop. For some unknown reason visual information is being excluded from subjective experience, but it’s not stopping the rest of the brain from using that visual input for self-preserving automatic purposes.
Similar phenomena are familiar to many of us in our regular lives. If you are walking in a crowded space you don’t have to carefully adjust your gait and your limbs to avoid collisions — that happens without conscious control.
If you have a regular commute you may have found yourself turning into your own driveway without any recollection of taking the actions necessary to get there. While you might remember the start of the drive, at some point you “zoned out” or just stopped concentrating on the task, and yet you got home anyway.
This is similar to blindsight in that the brain has accomplished a task without needing to engage consciousness in order to complete it. Apparently consciousness is not always that essential.
This is related to the mental state that high-functioning artists and athletes call flow. The flow state arises when the brain cuts out the executive middleman and connects the activity being performed directly to the skills needed to perform it.
It’s not quite the same as blindsight — many people subjectively experience and very much enjoy the flow state — and yet I expect that thinking too hard about it can cause it to end for just that reason. Certainly finding that you need to puzzle out a problem that’s hard to solve breaks flow. In this case consciousness can be an actual detriment.
It appears that consciousness may not be the be-all and end-all of cognition — not the brain’s purpose, but rather just one tool in the brain’s toolbox. Research has shown that most processing of perceptions happens below the threshold of conscious awareness. Raw sensory inputs are a cascade of rapid, staticky discharges, a massive flood of signals with no inherent order or meaning.
Starting immediately in the peripheral nervous system and proceeding all the way to the center of the brain a massive network of neurons processes, cleans up, and integrates those inputs. This takes time, from 50 to 150 milliseconds to compress direct physical impulses into simpler, more abstract states.
The result is what E. R. Clay called the specious present, a timestamped and labeled stream of abstractions that constitutes the brain’s best guess about what we just perceived about a tenth of a second ago, a time it calls “now”.
That long processing time can be a matter of life or death, so the system exploits fast paths when possible. Outside the central nervous system they are called reflexes — responses that happen so quickly that we can’t stop them.
In the properly conditioned brain signals can be shunted without thought, processed inputs moving smoothly into outputs: motor abstractions that get uncompressed into specific muscle activations. That shunt may manifest as blindsight or its more common variations.
Sometimes even higher brain functions can be involved, but in the name of speed they don’t need intervention by an overseeing executive — they just do what they know what to do. That may manifest as flow. But what if the brain doesn’t know what to do? It may be presented with a truly novel set of circumstances and none of the autonomic or learned fast paths apply. Finally we have arrived at the domain of consciousness.
This specious present, this sensorium tableau that is constructed by the continuous functioning of the nervous system, operates as a shared scratchpad for the brain’s various modules and intuitions to collaborate.
Like the detective’s bulletin board with clippings, photos, bit of evidence and partial conclusions all connected by strings of red yarn, the brain’s internal model allows for observations to come together and to be shared, and for new markup and meaning to be added.
This bulletin board and its cognitive modules share a common language, the language of the senses themselves. Images, fragments of motion, touch and smell, but above all auditory narrative storytelling.
Our brains make up stories about how this fact is connected to this other one, adorned with causal ordering and emotional meaning, and in the course of a (slow) half second or so it has a story of the moment, which gets committed to memory.
Those fragments of story get strung together further, connecting more plot points and more characters and that becomes the story of the hour or the day or the week, and the brain revises previous memories so that it all makes sense as a single narrative whole.
The story may be recited, edited again for the ear of the second party listener, and transduced into sound to pass along into another brain. That other brain may incorporate that story into itself and, when the moment arrives, apply that story to interpret the events in its own sensorium tableau.
The official record of this process, the narrative we call memory, is a log of our experiences, and the author of this log is what we experience as consciousness. That doesn’t explain how this experience happens, but this model clearly illustrates that consciousness can only arise inside a brain.
Consciousness doesn’t deal with sensory data directly, but relies on the huge perceptive networks of the brain to compress that data into abstractions which it can manipulate and process. Consciousness plays an outsized role in our individual story because it calls itself “me” — the author and protagonist — but it’s not as special as it thinks it is.
Purdue has been involved in measures against prescription drug abuse, particularly of Oxycontin, an often-abused prescription drug which is among the drugs most commonly cited in connection with overdose deaths.
In 2001, Connecticut Attorney General Richard Blumenthal issued a statement urging Purdue to take action regarding abuse of Oxycontin. He noted that while Purdue seemed sincere, there was little action being taken beyond "cosmetic and symbolic steps."
After Purdue announced plans to reformulate the drug, Blumenthal noted that this would take time and that "Purdue Pharma has a moral, if not legal obligation to take effective steps and address addiction and abuse even as it works to reformulate the drug." In 2004, the West Virginia Attorney General sued Purdue for reimbursement of "excessive prescription costs" paid by the state.
Saying that patients were taking more of the drug than they had been prescribed because the effects of the drug wore off hours before the 12-hour schedule, the state charged Purdue with deceptive marketing. In his ruling the trial judge wrote: "Plaintiff's evidence shows Purdue could have tested the safety and efficacy of OxyContin at eight hours, and could have amended their label, but did not."
The case never went to trial; Purdue agreed to settle by paying the state US$10 million(equivalent to approximately $14M in 2020) for programs to discourage drug abuse, with all the evidence remaining under seal and confidential.
In May 2007, the company pleaded guilty to misleading the public about OxyContin's risk of addiction and agreed to pay $600 million (equivalent to approximately $749M in 2020) in one of the largest pharmaceutical settlements in U.S. history.
The company's president (Michael Friedman), top lawyer (Howard R. Udell), and former chief medical officer (Paul D. Goldenheim) pleaded guilty as individuals to misbranding charges, a criminal violation and agreed to pay a total of US$34.5 million in fines.
Friedman, Udell, and Goldenheim agreed to pay US$19 million, US$8 million and US$7.5 million, respectively. In addition, three top executives were charged with a felony and sentenced to 400 hours of community service in drug treatment programs.
On October 4, 2007, Kentucky officials sued Purdue because of widespread OxyContin abuse in Appalachia. A lawsuit filed by Kentucky then-Attorney General Greg Stumbo and Pike County officials demanded millions in compensation.[46] Eight years later, on December 23, 2015 Kentucky settled with Purdue for $24 million.
In January 2017, the city of Everett, Washington sued Purdue based on increased costs for the city from the use of OxyContin as well as Purdue not intervening when they noted odd patterns of sale of their product, per agreement in the 2007 suit noted above.
The allegations say Purdue did not follow legal agreements to track suspicious excess ordering or potential black market usage. The suit says false clinics created by unscrupulous doctors used homeless individuals as 'patients' to purchase OxyContin, then sold it to the citizens of Everett.
The black market sale of the drug out of legal pharmacies based in Los Angeles with distributions points in Everett is also said to be part of the experience of the city according to the suit. No intervention was made by Purdue to contact the DEA for years despite knowing of the practice and the overuse and sale of their product.
The suit asks for a yet to be determined reimbursement related to costs of policing, housing, health care, rehabilitation, criminal justice system, park and recreations department, as well as to the loss of life or compromised quality of life of the citizens of Everett directly.
In May 2018, six states—Florida, Nevada, North Carolina, North Dakota, Tennessee and Texas—filed lawsuits charging deceptive marketing practices, adding to 16 previously filed lawsuits by other U.S. states and Puerto Rico.
By January 2019, 36 states were suing Purdue Pharma. Massachusetts attorney general Maura Healey complains in her lawsuit that eight members of the Sackler family are "personally responsible" for the deception. She alleges they "micromanaged" a "deceptive sales campaign."
In March 2019, Purdue Pharma reached a $270m settlement in a lawsuit filed by Oklahoma, which claimed its opioids contributed to the deaths of thousands of people.
In August 2019, Purdue Pharma and the Sackler family were in negotiations to settle the claims for a payment of $10-$12 billion. The settlement would include a Chapter 11 filing by Purdue Pharma, which would be restructured as public beneficiary trust and the Sackler Family would give up any ownership in the company.
Addiction treatment drugs currently developed by the company would be given to the public cost-free. All profits of Purdue would henceforth go to the plaintiffs in the case. On top of that, the Sackler family would contribute $3 billion in cash. The family would also sell Mundipharma and contribute another $1.5 billion from the sales proceeds to the settlement.
However, the Sackler family would remain a billionaire family and would not be criminally charged for contributing to the opioid crisis. On September 2019, the office of the New York Attorney General accused the Sackler family of hiding money by wiring at least $1 billion from company accounts to personal accounts overseas. In October 2020, Purdue agreed to an $8 billion settlement that includes a $2 billion criminal forfeiture, a $3.54 billion criminal fine, and $2.8 billion in damages for its civil liability.
It will plead guilty to three criminal charges, and it will become a public benefit company under a trust that is required to consider American public health. The Sacklers will not be permitted to be involved in the new company.
The Rincon Oil Field is a large oil field on the coast of southern California, about 10 miles (16 km) northwest of the city of Ventura, and about 20 miles (32 km) east-southeast of the city of Santa Barbara. It is the westernmost onshore field in a series of three fields which follow the Ventura Anticline, an east-west trending feature paralleling the Transverse Ranges.
Discovered in 1927, the oil field is ranked 36th in California by size of recoverable oil reserves, and while mostly depleted – now having, by California Department of Conservation estimates, only about 2.5% of its original oil – it remains productive, with 77 wells active at the beginning of 2008.
Oil produced in the field flows through the M-143 pipeline, which parallels U.S. Highway 101 southeast to the Ventura Pump Station, at which point it joins a Tosco pipeline which carries it to Los Angeles area refineries.
As of 2009, the primary operators of the field were Occidental Petroleum for the onshore portion, and Greka Energy for the offshore portion. The offshore part of the field is operated mainly from Rincon Island.
The field occupies a range of steep hills, loosely grouped with the Santa Ynez Mountains, which attain heights of over 2100 feet at Rincon Mountain and Red Mountain. Highway 101 occupies the narrow terrace at the base of the hills where they meet the Pacific Ocean.
Drainage is by ephemeral streams directly into the ocean. The entire area is highly prone to landslides; in 2005, the adjacent unincorporated town of La Conchita was the site of a landslide that killed 10 people. During exceptionally rainy winters, Highway 101 can be cut by landslides.
Native vegetation consists of coastal sage scrub and chaparral. Climate in the area is Mediterranean, with cool rainy winters and mild summers, the heat being moderated by morning fog and low clouds. About 15 inches of rain fall each year, with slightly more at higher elevations.
The Rincon Oil and Gas Processing Facility is adjacent to the oil field, on a hilltop which has been graded flat, about a mile east of Pitas Point. Rather than processing oil from the Rincon field, it receives and processes oil from the offshore Dos Cuadras and Carpinteria fields, feeding it into the M-143 pipeline which crosses through the Rincon field on the way to Ventura.
A single massive 268,000 barrel tank, the feature of the plant visible at the greatest distance, stores oil from the Rincon field prior to shipping it through the pipeline. The offshore part of the field is mostly in shallow water, and is accessed from Rincon Island, an artificial island about two-thirds of a mile south of Punta Gorda, connected to the mainland by a 3,000-foot (910 m) causeway.
This plank causeway is too narrow for regular vehicular traffic, but contains pipelines to carry oilfield liquids – oil and produced water – as well as natural gas back to the shore, where they are processed at the La Conchita Oil and Gas Processing Facility.
Stansfield was born near Littleborough, Lancashire, in 1874. He was the eldest son of Abraham Stansfield (b.1853) and Mary Ann Stansfield née Riley (b.1859). Abraham was a descendant of the Stansfield family of Stansfield, Yorkshire.
His siblings were Amelia Stansfield (b.1872) and Ernest Stansfield (b.1876). His father, Abraham Stansfield, was born in Walsden, and his mother was born in Stacksteads. In the 1881 Census (taken on 3 April 1881), the family were living with Mary Ann’s mother, Jane Riley (b.1825), in Old Tunstead Road, Newchurch.
By the 1891 Census (taken on 5 April 1891), Mary Ann was deceased, and her widower and children were living in Brandwood Road, Spotland. James, aged 16, was employed as a cotton weaver.
Copper wire is currently the most commonly used type of physical media due to the abundance of copper in the world, as well as its ability to conduct electrical power. Copper is also one of the cheaper metals which makes it more feasible to use.
Most copper wires used in data communications today have eight strands of copper, organized in unshielded twisted pairs, or UTP. The wires are twisted around one another because it reduces electrical interference from outside sources.
In addition to UTP, some wires use shielded twisted pairs (STP), which reduce electrical interference even further. The way copper wires are twisted around one another also has an effect on data rates. Category 3 cable (Cat3), has three to four twists per foot and can support speeds of 10 Mbit/s.[1] Category 5 cable (Cat5) is newer and has three to four twists per inch, which results in a maximum data rate of 100 Mbit/s.
Optical fiber is a thin and flexible piece of fiber made of glass or plastic. Unlike copper wire, optical fiber is typically used for long-distance data communications, being that it allows for data transmission over far distances and can produce high transmission speeds.
There are two major types of optical fiber in use today. Multimode fiber is approximately 62.5 µm in diameter and utilizes light-emitting diodes to carry signals over a maximum distance of about 2 kilometers. Single mode fiber is approximately 10 µm in diameter and is capable of carrying signals over tens of miles.
Coaxial cables have two different layers surrounding a copper core. The inner most layer has an insulator. The next layer has a conducting shield. Optical fiber also does not require signal repeaters, which ends up reducing maintenance costs, since signal repeaters are known to fail often.
These are both covered by a plastic jacket. Coaxial cables are used for microwaves, televisions and computers. This was the second transmission medium to be introduced (often called coax), around the mid-1920s.
In the center of a coaxial cable is a copper wire that acts as a conductor, where the information travels. The copper wire in coax is thicker than that in twisted-pair, and it is also unaffected by surrounding wires that contribute to electromagnetic interference, so it can provide higher transmission rates than the twisted-pair.
The center conductor is surrounded by plastic insulation, which helps filter out extraneous interference. This insulation is covered by a return path, which is usually braided-copper shielding or aluminum foil type covering.
Outer jackets form a protective covering for coax; the number and type of outer jackets depend on the intended use of the cable (e.g., whether the cable is supposed to be strung in the air or underground, whether rodent protection is required). The two most popular types of coaxial cabling are used with Ethernet networks.
Thinnet is used on Ethernet 10BASE2 networks and is the thinner and more flexible of the two. Unlike a thicknet, it uses a Bayonet Niell-Concelman (BNC) on each end to connect to computers. Thinnet is part of the RG-58 family of cable with a maximum cable length of 185 meters and transmission speeds of 10 Mbit/s.
Thicknet coaxial cabling is used with Ethernet 10BASE5 networks, has a maximum cable length of 500 meters and transmission speeds of 10 Mbit/s. It's expensive and not commonly used, though it was originally used to directly connect computers.
The computer is connected to the transceiver at the cable from the attachment unit interface of its network card using a drop cable. Maximum thicknet nodes are 100 on a segment. One end of each cable is grounded.
In the midst of the 1920s, coax was applied to telephone networks as inter-office trunks. Rather than adding more copper cable bundles with 1500 or 1000 pairs of copper wire and cable in them, it was possible to replace those big cables with much smaller coaxial cable.
The next major use of coax in telecommunications occurred in the 1950s, when it was deployed as submarine cable to carry international traffic. It was then introduced into the data processing realm in the mid 1960s.
Early computer architectures required coax as the media type from the terminal to the host. Local area networks were predominantly based on coax from 1980 to about 1987.[citation needed]
Coax has also been used in cable tv and the local loop, in the form of HFC architecture. HFC brings fiber as close as possible to the neighborhood. Fiber terminates at the neighborhood node, where coax fans out to provide home service.
After winning the second season of The Next Food Network Star[25] on April 23, 2006, Fieri was awarded a six-episode commitment for his own cooking show on Food Network. Guy's Big Bite premiered on June 25, 2006, with the most recent episode airing on November 16, 2016.
Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives, his second series, premiered in April 2007 (a one-hour special aired in November 2006), with Fieri traveling the country visiting local eateries. The New York Times called the series "not a cooking show as much as a carefully engineered reality show".
Ultimate Recipe Showdown, co-hosted with Marc Summers, debuted on February 17, 2008, and aired for three seasons. On September 14, 2008, Guy Off the Hook debuted on Food Network.
This special studio audience show aired through the end of 2008, but the extra cost of staging an audience show did not result in a ratings bump and the concept was discontinued. For Thanksgiving 2008, Fieri hosted a one-hour special titled Guy's Family Feast.
He used the "Guy Off the Hook" set for the special, which was broadcast live, on November 28, 2008. Fieri appeared on other Food Network programs such as Dinner: Impossible in 2007 and 2009, Paula's Party, Ace of Cakes, and The Best Thing I Ever Ate.
In December 2009, NBC named Fieri as the host of the game show Minute to Win It, which premiered in March 2010 and aired for two seasons. On May 13, 2012, NBC announced that the game show would not be renewed for a third season, citing high production costs and low ratings.
Fieri receives the key to the city of Ferndale from the Ferndale City Council at a special council meeting on November 23, 2012. In January 2012, Fieri was one of the two team captains (along with Rachael Ray) in the Food Network reality series Rachael vs. Guy: Celebrity Cook-Off.
A second season of Rachael vs. Guy: Celebrity Cook-Off began airing on Food Network on January 6, 2013. A chef challenge show, Guy's Grocery Games, started on October 27, 2013, on the Food Network. It features four cooks who battle through three rounds, and are judged by three judges.
His series, Guy's Family Road Trip, was chosen as the 2017 lead-out show from season 13 of Food Network Star. It previewed on August 13 of that year. In May 2021, Fieri signed a three-year contract with Food Network worth an estimated $80 million. Joshua Brett Tenenbaum (Josh Tenenbaum) is Professor of Computational Cognitive Science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
According to the MacArthur Foundation, which named him a MacArthur Fellow in 2019, "Tenenbaum is one of the first to develop and apply probabilistic and statistical modeling to the study of human learning, reasoning, and perception, and to show how these models can explain a fundamental challenge of cognition: how our minds understand so much from so little, so quickly."
Tenenbaum grew up in California. His mother was a teacher and his father is Internet commerce pioneer Jay Martin Tenenbaum. He is known for contributions to mathematical psychology and Bayesian cognitive science.
His research direction was strongly influenced by his parents' interest in teaching and learning, and later by interactions with cognitive psychologist Roger Shepard, during his years at Yale.
Tenenbaum received his undergraduate degree in physics from Yale University in 1993, and his Ph.D. from MIT in 1999.In 2018, R & D Magazine named Tenenbaum their "Innovator of the Year." His work focuses on analyzing probabilistic inference as the engine of human cognition and as a means to develop machine learning.
According to the MacArthur Foundation, "Tenenbaum is one of the first to develop and apply probabilistic and statistical modeling to the study of human learning, reasoning, and perception, and to show how these models can explain a fundamental challenge of cognition: how our minds understand so much from so little, so quickly."
At MIT, Tenebaum is a professor of computational cognitive science and a member of CSAIL, MIT’s Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. He leads MIT's Computational Cognitive Science lab and is also head of an AI project called the MIT Quest for Intelligence.
In 2019, Tenenbaum was named a MacArthur Fellow. The MacArthur webpage describes his work as follows: "Combining computational models with behavioral experiments to shed light on human learning, reasoning, and perception, and exploring how to bring artificial intelligence closer to the capabilities of human thinking."
Tenenbaum's recent research includes teaching AI systems to imitate human face-recognition methods and programming AI to understand cause and effect. Recent progress in artificial intelligence has renewed interest in building systems that learn and think like people.
Many advances have come from using deep neural networks trained end-to-end in tasks such as object recognition, video games, and board games, achieving performance that equals or even beats that of humans in some respects.
Despite their biological inspiration and performance achievements, these systems differ from human intelligence in crucial ways. We review progress in cognitive science suggesting that truly human-like learning and thinking machines will have to reach beyond current engineering trends in both what they learn and how they learn it.
Specifically, we argue that these machines should build causal models of the world that support explanation and understanding, rather than merely solving pattern recognition problems;
ground learning in intuitive theories of physics and psychology to support and enrich the knowledge that is learned; and harness compositionality and learning-to-learn to rapidly acquire and generalize knowledge to new tasks and situations.
We suggest concrete challenges and promising routes toward these goals that can combine the strengths of recent neural network advances with more structured cognitive models.
We see a role for neural networks in developing more human-like learning machines: They have been applied in compelling ways to many types of machine learning problems, demonstrating the power of gradient-based learning and deep hierarchies of latent variables.
Neural networks also have a rich history as computational models of cognition (McClelland et al. Reference McClelland and Rumelhart1986; Rumelhart et al. Reference Rumelhart and McClelland1986b). It is a history we describe in more detail in the next section. At a more fundamental level, any computational model of learning must ultimately be grounded in the brain's biological neural networks.
We also believe that future generations of neural networks will look very different from the current state-of-the-art neural networks. They may be endowed with intuitive physics, theory of mind, causal reasoning, and other capacities we describe in the sections that follow.
More structure and inductive biases could be built into the networks or learned from previous experience with related tasks, leading to more human-like patterns of learning and development.
Networks may learn to effectively search for and discover new mental models or intuitive theories, and these improved models will, in turn, enable subsequent learning, allowing systems that learn-to-learn – using previous knowledge to make richer inferences from very small amounts of training data.
It is also important to draw a distinction between AI that purports to emulate or draw inspiration from aspects of human cognition and AI that does not. This article focuses on the former.
The latter is a perfectly reasonable and useful approach to developing AI algorithms: avoiding cognitive or neural inspiration as well as claims of cognitive or neural plausibility. Indeed, this is how many researchers have proceeded, and this article has little pertinence to work conducted under this research strategy.
Footnote 1 On the other hand, we believe that reverse engineering human intelligence can usefully inform AI and machine learning (and has already done so), especially for the types of domains and tasks that people excel at.
Despite recent computational achievements, people are better than machines at solving a range of difficult computational problems, including concept learning, scene understanding, language acquisition, language understanding, speech recognition, and so on.
Other human cognitive abilities remain difficult to understand computationally, including creativity, common sense, and general-purpose reasoning.
As long as natural intelligence remains the best example of intelligence, we believe that the project of reverse engineering the human solutions to difficult computational problems will continue to inform and advance AI.
Finally, whereas we focus on neural network approaches to AI, we do not wish to give the impression that these are the only contributors to recent advances in AI.
On the contrary, some of the most exciting recent progress has been in new forms of probabilistic machine learning (Ghahramani Reference Ghahramani2015).
For example, researchers have developed automated statistical reasoning techniques (Lloyd et al. Reference Lloyd, Duvenaud, Grosse, Tenenbaum and Ghahramani2014), automated techniques for model building and selection.
We believe that these approaches will play important roles in future AI systems, and they are at least as compatible with the ideas from cognitive science we discuss here. However, a full discussion of those connections is beyond the scope of the current article.
The central goal of this article is to propose a set of core ingredients for building more human-like learning and thinking machines. We elaborate on each of these ingredients and topics in Section 4, but here we briefly overview the key ideas.
The first set of ingredients focuses on developmental “start-up software,” or cognitive capabilities present early in development. There are several reasons for this focus on development.
If an ingredient is present early in development, it is certainly active and available well before a child or adult would attempt to learn the types of tasks discussed in this paper.
This is true regardless of whether the early-present ingredient is itself learned from experience or innately present. Also, the earlier an ingredient is present, the more likely it is to be foundational to later development and learning. We focus on two pieces of developmental start-up software (see Wellman & Gelman [Reference Wellman and Gelman1992] for a review of both).
First is intuitive physics (sect. 4.1.1): Infants have primitive object concepts that allow them to track objects over time and to discount physically implausible trajectories. For example, infants know that objects will persist over time and that they are solid and coherent.
Equipped with these general principles, people can learn more quickly and make more accurate predictions. Although a task may be new, physics still works the same way. A second type of software present in early development is intuitive psychology (sect. 4.1.2): Infants understand that other people have mental states like goals and beliefs, and this understanding strongly constrains their learning and predictions.
A child watching an expert play a new video game can infer that the avatar has agency and is trying to seek reward while avoiding punishment. This inference immediately constrains other inferences, allowing the child to infer what objects are good and what objects are bad. These types of inferences further accelerate the learning of new tasks.
Our second set of ingredients focus on learning. Although there are many perspectives on learning, we see model building as the hallmark of human-level learning, or explaining observed data through the construction of causal models of the world (sect. 4.2.2).
From this perspective, the early-present capacities for intuitive physics and psychology are also causal models of the world. A primary job of learning is to extend and enrich these models and to build analogous causally structured theories of other domains.
Compared with state-of-the-art algorithms in machine learning, human learning is distinguished by its richness and its efficiency. Children come with the ability and the desire to uncover the underlying causes of sparsely observed events and to use that knowledge to go far beyond the paucity of the data.
It might seem paradoxical that people are capable of learning these richly structured models from very limited amounts of experience.
We suggest that compositionality and learning-to-learn are ingredients that make this type of rapid model learning possible (sects. 4.2.1 and 4.2.3, respectively). A final set of ingredients concerns how the rich models our minds build are put into action, in real time (sect. 4.3). It is remarkable how fast we are to perceive and to act.
People can comprehend a novel scene in a fraction of a second, or a novel utterance in little more than the time it takes to say it and hear it. An important motivation for using neural networks in machine vision and speech systems is to respond as quickly as the brain does.
Although neural networks are usually aiming at pattern recognition rather than model building, we discuss ways in which these “model-free” methods can accelerate slow model-based inferences in perception and cognition (sect. 4.3.1) (see Glossary in Table 1).
By learning to recognize patterns in these inferences, the outputs of inference can be predicted without having to go through costly intermediate steps. However, planning in complex models is cumbersome and slow, making the speed-accuracy trade-off unfavorable for real-time control.
Integrating neural networks that “learn to do inference” with rich model building learning mechanisms offers a promising way to explain how human minds can understand the world so well and so quickly.
We also discuss the integration of model-based and model-free methods in reinforcement learning (sect. 4.3.2.), an area that has seen rapid recent progress.
Once a causal model of a task has been learned, humans can use the model to plan action sequences that maximize future reward. When rewards are used as the metric for successs in model building, this is known as model-based reinforcement learning.
By contrast, model-free reinforcement learning algorithms, such as current instantiations of deep reinforcement learning, support fast control, but at the cost of inflexibility and possibly accuracy.
We review evidence that humans combine model-based and model-free learning algorithms both competitively and cooperatively and that these interactions are supervised by metacognitive processes.
The sophistication of human-like reinforcement learning has yet to be realized in AI systems, but this is an area where crosstalk between cognitive and engineering approaches is especially promising.
The questions of whether and how AI should relate to human cognitive psychology are older than the terms artificial intelligence and cognitive psychology.
Alan Turing suspected that it was easier to build and educate a child-machine than try to fully capture adult human cognition (Turing Reference Turing1950). Turing pictured the child's mind as a notebook with “rather little mechanism and lots of blank sheets,” and the mind of a child-machine as filling in the notebook by responding to rewards and punishments, similar to reinforcement learning.
This view on representation and learning echoes behaviorism, a dominant psychological tradition in Turing's time. It also echoes the strong empiricism of modern connectionist models – the idea that we can learn almost everything we know from the statistical patterns of sensory inputs.
Cognitive science repudiated the oversimplified behaviorist view and came to play a central role in early AI research (Boden Reference Boden2006). Newell and Simon (Reference Newell and Simon1961) developed their “General Problem Solver” as both an AI algorithm and a model of human problem solving, which they subsequently tested experimentally (Newell & Simon Reference Newell and Simon1972).
AI pioneers in other areas of research explicitly referenced human cognition and even published papers in cognitive psychology journals (e.g., Bobrow & Winograd Reference Bobrow and Winograd1977; Hayes-Roth & Hayes-Roth Reference Hayes-Roth and Hayes-Roth1979; Winograd Reference Winograd1972).
For example, Schank (Reference Schank1972), writing in the journal Cognitive Psychology, declared that “We hope to be able to build a program that can learn, as a child does, how to do what we have described in this paper instead of being spoon-fed the tremendous information necessary” (p. 629).
A similar sentiment was expressed by Minsky (Reference Minsky1974): “I draw no boundary between a theory of human thinking and a scheme for making an intelligent machine; no purpose would be served by separating these today since neither domain has theories good enough to explain—or to produce—enough mental capacity”.
Much of this research assumed that human knowledge representation is symbolic and that reasoning, language, planning and vision could be understood in terms of symbolic operations.
Parallel to these developments, a radically different approach was being explored based on neuron-like “sub-symbolic” computations (e.g., Fukushima Reference Fukushima1980; Grossberg Reference Grossberg1976; Rosenblatt Reference Rosenblatt1958).
The representations and algorithms used by this approach were more directly inspired by neuroscience than by cognitive psychology, although ultimately it would flower into an influential school of thought about the nature of cognition: parallel distributed processing (PDP) (McClelland et al.
Reference McClelland and Rumelhart1986; Rumelhart et al. Reference Rumelhart and McClelland1986b). As its name suggests, PDP emphasizes parallel computation by combining simple units to collectively implement sophisticated computations.
The knowledge learned by these neural networks is thus distributed across the collection of units rather than localized as in most symbolic data structures.The resurgence of recent interest in neural networks, more commonly referred to as “deep learning,” shares the same representational commitments and often even the same learning algorithms as the earlier PDP models.
“Deep” refers to the fact that more powerful models can be built by composing many layers of representation, still very much in the PDP style while utilizing recent advances in hardware and computing capabilities, as well as massive data sets, to learn deeper models.
Some of the original work done under the banner of PDP (Rumelhart et al. Reference Rumelhart and McClelland1986b) is closer to model building than pattern recognition, whereas the recent large-scale discriminative deep learning systems more purely exemplify pattern recognition (see Bottou [Reference Bottou2014] for a related discussion).
But, as discussed, there is also a question of the nature of the learned representations within the model – their form, compositionality, and transferability – and the developmental start-up software that was used to get there. We focus on these issues in this article.
Neural network models and the PDP approach offer a view of the mind (and intelligence more broadly) that is sub-symbolic and often populated with minimal constraints and inductive biases to guide learning.
Proponents of this approach maintain that many classic types of structured knowledge, such as graphs, grammars, rules, objects, structural descriptions, and programs, can be useful yet misleading metaphors for characterizing thought.
These structures are more epiphenomenal than real, emergent properties of more fundamental sub-symbolic cognitive processes (McClelland et al. Reference McClelland, Botvinick, Noelle, Plaut, Rogers, Seidenberg and Smith2010).
Compared with other paradigms for studying cognition, this position on the nature of representation is often accompanied by a relatively “blank slate” vision of initial knowledge and representation, much like Turing's blank notebook.
When attempting to understand a particular cognitive ability or phenomenon within this paradigm, a common scientific strategy is to train a relatively generic neural network to perform the task, adding additional ingredients only when necessary.
This approach has shown that neural networks can behave as if they learned explicitly structured knowledge, such as a rule for producing the past tense of words (Rumelhart & McClelland Reference Rumelhart, McClelland, Rumelhart and McClelland1986)
rules for solving simple balance beam physics problems (McClelland Reference McClelland1988), or a tree to represent types of living things (plants and animals) and their distribution of properties (Rogers & McClelland Reference Rogers and McClelland2004).
Training large-scale relatively generic networks is also the best current approach for object recognition, where the high-level feature representations of these convolutional nets have also been used to predict patterns of neural response in human and macaque IT cortex, as well as human typicality ratings
similarity ratings for images of common objects. Moreover, researchers have trained generic networks to perform structured and even strategic tasks, such as the recent work on using a Deep Q-learning Network (DQN) to play simple video games.
If neural networks have such broad application in machine vision, language, and control, and if they can be trained to emulate the rule-like and structured behaviors that characterize cognition, do we need more to develop truly human-like learning and thinking machines? How far can relatively generic neural networks bring us toward this goal?
Although cognitive science has not yet converged on a single account of the mind or intelligence, the claim that a mind is a collection of general-purpose neural networks with few initial constraints is rather extreme in contemporary cognitive science.
A different picture has emerged that highlights the importance of early inductive biases, including core concepts such as number, space, agency, and objects, as well as powerful learning algorithms that rely on prior knowledge to extract knowledge from small amounts of training data.
Here we present two challenge problems for machine learning and AI: learning simple visual concepts (Lake et al. Reference Lake, Salakhutdinov and Tenenbaum2015a) and learning to play the Atari game Frostbite. We also use the problems as running examples to illustrate the importance of core cognitive ingredients in the sections that follow. 3.1. The Characters Challenge
The first challenge concerns handwritten character recognition, a classic problem for comparing different types of machine learning algorithms. It is also important to clarify that the PDP perspective is compatible with “model building” in addition to “pattern recognition.”
Hofstadter (Reference Hofstadter1985) argued that the problem of recognizing characters in all of the ways people do – both handwritten and printed – contains most, if not all, of the fundamental challenges of AI.
Whether or not this statement is correct, it highlights the surprising complexity that underlies even “simple” human-level concepts like letters. More practically, handwritten character recognition is a real problem that children and adults must learn to solve, with practical applications ranging from reading envelope addresses or checks in an automated teller machine (ATM).
Handwritten character recognition is also simpler than more general forms of object recognition; the object of interest is two-dimensional, separated from the background, and usually unoccluded. Compared with how people learn and see other types of objects, it seems possible, in the near term, to build algorithms that can see most of the structure in characters that people can see.
The standard benchmark is the Mixed National Institute of Standards and Technology (MNIST) data set for digit recognition, which involves classifying images of digits into the categories ‘0’ to ‘9’ (LeCun et al. Reference LeCun, Bottou, Bengio and Haffner1998).
The training set provides 6,000 images per class for a total of 60,000 training images. With a large amount of training data available, many algorithms achieve respectable performance, including K-nearest neighbors (5% test error), support vector machines (about 1% test error), and convolutional neural networks.
The best results achieved using deep convolutional nets are very close to human-level performance at an error rate of 0.2% (Ciresan et al. Reference Ciresan, Meier and Schmidhuber2012). Similarly, recent results applying convolutional nets to the far more challenging ImageNet object recognition benchmark have shown that human-level performance is within reach on that data set as well.
Although humans and neural networks may perform equally well on the MNIST digit recognition task and other large-scale image classification tasks, it does not mean that they learn and think in the same way. There are at least two important differences: people learn from fewer examples and they learn richer representations, a comparison true for both learning handwritten characters and for learning more general classes of objects.
People can learn to recognize a new handwritten character from a single example, allowing them to discriminate between novel instances drawn by other people and similar looking non-instances. Moreover, people learn more than how to do pattern recognition: they learn a concept, that is, a model of the class that allows their acquired knowledge to be flexibly applied in new ways.
In addition to recognizing new examples, people can also generate new examples, parse a character into its most important parts and relations, and generate new characters given a small set of related characters. These additional abilities come for free along with the acquisition of the underlying concept.
In November 1941, as concerns about war with the Japanese in the Pacific grew, the Thai minister of justice, Thamrong Navasawat, met the Australian prime minister, Robert Gordon Menzies, in Canberra during a goodwill tour of the British Empire in Asia. This meeting was designed to assure the government of Australia of Thailand's neutrality.
The British had been pressing the Australians to establish a legation in Bangkok, but the latter still preferred that their interests be represented by Westminster. On 8 December, the Japanese invaded Thailand and the Thais quickly accepted Japanese terms for the transit of their armies.
On 21 December, Thailand signed a broad military alliance with Japan. The Allied bombing of Thailand had already begun when, on 25 January 1942, the Thai government declared war on Britain and the United States.
While the latter refused to accept the action as a free one and did not regard Thailand as other than an occupied country, Britain responded in kind.
Since Australia then had no representation in Bangkok, Canberra asked the Swiss to inform the Thai government on 2 March that it had declared war on Thailand. There was no response, and the Thais claimed after the war that they had no intention of going to war with Australia and were unaware of the convention that Australia was at war whenever Britain was.
There were only eleven Thai persons in Australia at the time, and all were watched by the Security Service of the Commonwealth Investigations Branch. Some Australians, mostly employees of the tin mines, were interned along with the British in Thailand.
In October 1945, the Chifley Government sent Lieutenant-Colonel Allan J. Eastman of the Australian Army as their representative in Allied-occupied Bangkok. J. C. R. Proud
the Australian political representative in Singapore, summed up the government's position with regards to peace with Thailand when he advised Eastman that "the death in Siam of so many Australian prisoners of war is a fact which cannot be disregarded by us."
The British suggested that Australia should negotiate its own peace treaty with Thailand, and it was briefly considered elevating Eastman to the post of minister to Thailand, but it was decided not to establish full diplomatic relations with a state with which Australia was still at war.
Eastman was appointed consul and participated in Anglo-Thai negotiations taking place at Singapore even before royal assent to his consulship was obtained. By simulating these planning processes, people can predict what agents might do next, or use inverse reasoning from observing a series of actions to infer the utilities and beliefs of agents in a scene.
Since Thailand had never formally recognised a state of war with Australia, it regarded a separate treaty with the latter as a technicality.
Australia's terms were simply that Thailand end its state of war with Britain and accept Britain's peace terms. It insisted on the trial of collaborators with the Japanese—which the Thais resented—and on reparations in relation to the tin mines.
The Thais did try and imprison former Prime Minister Plaek Phibunsongkhram in order to forestall any Allied tribunal before signing the Anglo-Thai Peace Treaty on 1 January 1946. After the British peace treaty, Eastman exchanged notes with the Thai negotiator, Prince Vivadhanajaya Jayanta, confirming that a separate treaty with Australia would be signed no later than 3 April.
The government in Canberra considered withdrawing him from Bangkok at that point, but he urged his retention so long as the process for determining compensation claims lasted. This knowledge is often richly organized and theory-like in structure, capable of the graded inferences and productive capacities characteristic of human thought.
He was not withdrawn until ratifications of the peace treaty were exchanged in May. In 1950 Thailand agreed to pay £6 million in compensation to the governments of Britain and Australia for wartime damage to their tin mining operations.
Although the cue is easily calculated, the scenario is also easily changed to necessitate a different type of cue. Suppose A was already negatively associated (a “bad guy”); acting negatively toward A could then be seen as good (Hamlin Reference Hamlin2013).
Or suppose something harmful was in the box, which A did not know about. Now B would be seen as helping, protecting, or defending A. Suppose A knew there was something bad in the box and wanted it anyway. B could be seen as acting paternalistically.
A cue-based account would be twisted into gnarled combinations such as, “If an expected trajectory is prevented from completion, the blocking agent is given some negative association, unless that trajectory leads to a negative outcome or the blocking agent is previously associated as positive, or the blocked agent is previously associated as negative, or….”
One alternative to a cue-based account is to use generative models of action choice, as in the Bayesian inverse planning, or Bayesian theory of mind (ToM), models of Baker et al. or the naive utility calculus models of Jara-Ettinger et al.
and a related alternative based on predictive coding from Kilner et al. [Reference Kilner, Friston and Frith2007]). These models formalize explicitly mentalistic concepts such as “goal,” “agent,” “planning,” “cost,” “efficiency,” and “belief,” used to describe core psychological reasoning in infancy.
They assume adults and children treat agents as approximately rational planners who choose the most efficient means to their goals. Planning computations may be formalized as solutions to Markov decision processes (MDPs) or partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs)
taking as input utility and belief functions defined over an agent's state-space and the agent's state-action transition functions, and returning a series of actions the agent should perform to most efficiently fulfill their goals (or maximize their utility).
his is directly analogous to how simulation engines can be used for intuitive physics, to predict what will happen next in a scene or to infer objects’ dynamical properties from how they move. It yields similarly flexible reasoning abilities: Utilities and beliefs can be adjusted to take into account how agents might act for a wide range of novel goals and situations.
Importantly, unlike in intuitive physics, simulation-based reasoning in intuitive psychology can be nested recursively to understand social interactions. We can think about agents thinking about other agents.
As in the case of intuitive physics, the success that generic deep networks will have in capturing intuitive psychological reasoning will depend in part on the representations humans use. Although deep networks have not yet been applied to scenarios involving theory of mind and intuitive psychology, they could probably learn visual cues, heuristics and summary statistics of a scene that happens to involve agents.
Footnote 5 If that is all that underlies human psychological reasoning, a data-driven deep learning approach can likely find success in this domain. However, it seems to us that any full formal account of intuitive psychological reasoning needs to include representations of agency, goals, efficiency, and reciprocal relations.
As with objects and forces, it is unclear whether a complete representation of these concepts (agents, goals, etc.) could emerge from deep neural networks trained in a purely predictive capacity. Similar to the intuitive physics domain, it is possible that with a tremendous number of training trajectories in a variety of scenarios, deep learning techniques could approximate the reasoning found in infancy even without learning anything about goal-directed or socially directed behavior more generally.
But this is also unlikely to resemble how humans learn, understand, and apply intuitive psychology unless the concepts are genuine.
In the same way that altering the setting of a scene or the target of inference in a physics-related task may be difficult to generalize without an understanding of objects, altering the setting of an agent or their goals and beliefs is difficult to reason about without understanding intuitive psychology.
In introducing the Frostbite challenge, we discussed how people can learn to play the game extremely quickly by watching an experienced player for just a few minutes and then playing a few rounds themselves. Intuitive psychology provides a basis for efficient learning from others, especially in teaching settings with the goal of communicating knowledge efficiently.
In the case of watching an expert play Frostbite, whether or not there is an explicit goal to teach, intuitive psychology lets us infer the beliefs, desires, and intentions of the experienced player. For example, we can learn that the birds are to be avoided from seeing how the experienced player appears to avoid them.
We do not need to experience a single example of encountering a bird, and watching Frostbite Bailey die because of the bird, to infer that birds are probably dangerous. It is enough to see that the experienced player's avoidance behavior is best explained as acting under that belief.
Similarly, consider how a sidekick agent (increasingly popular in video games) is expected to help a player achieve his or her goals.
This agent can be useful in different ways in different circumstances, such as getting items, clearing paths, fighting, defending, healing, and providing information, all under the general notion of being helpful (Macindoe Reference Macindoe2013).
An explicit agent representation can predict how such an agent will be helpful in new circumstances, whereas a bottom-up pixel-based representation is likely to struggle. There are several ways that intuitive psychology could be incorporated into contemporary deep learning systems. Although it could be built in, intuitive psychology may arise in other ways.
Connectionists have argued that innate constraints in the form of hard-wired cortical circuits are unlikely, but a simple inductive bias, for example, the tendency to notice things that move other things, can bootstrap reasoning about more abstract concepts of agency.
Footnote 6 Similarly, a great deal of goal-directed and socially directed actions can also be boiled down to a simple utility calculus, in a way that could be shared with other cognitive abilities.
Although the origins of intuitive psychology are still a matter of debate, it is clear that these abilities are early emerging and play an important role in human learning and thought, as exemplified in the Frostbite challenge and when learning to play novel video games more broadly.
Reverend Jacobs got fired because of the sermon he gave from his pulpit on November 21, 1965. That was easy to look up on the Internet, because I had a landmark to go by: it was the Sunday before Thanksgiving. He was gone from our lives a week later, and he went alone. Patsy and Morris—dubbed Tag-Along-Morrie by the kids in MYF—were already gone by then.
So was the Plymouth Belvedere with the push-button drive. My memory of the three years between the day when I first saw Peaceable Lake and the day of the Terrible Sermon are surprisingly clear, although before beginning this account, I would have told you I remembered little.
After all, I would have said, how many of us remember the years between six and nine in any detail? But writing is a wonderful and terrible thing. It opens deep wells of memory that were previously capped.
I feel I could push aside the account I set out to write and instead fill a book—and not a small one—about those years and that world, which is so different from the one I live in now.
I remember my mother, standing at the ironing board in her slip, impossibly beautiful in the morning sunshine. I remember my saggy-seated bathing suit, an unattractive loden green, and swimming in Harry’s Pond with my brothers.
We used to tell each other the slimy bottom was cowshit, but it was just mud (probably just mud). I remember drowsy afternoons in the one-room West Harlow school, sitting on winter coats in Spelling Corner and trying to get poor stupid Dicky Osgood to get giraffe right. I even remember him saying, “W-W-Why sh-should I have to suh-suh-spell one when I’ll never suh-suh-see one?”
I remember the webwork of dirt roads that crisscrossed our town, and playing marbles in the schoolyard during frigid April recesses, and the sound the wind made in the pines as I lay in my bed, prayers said and waiting for sleep. I remember my father coming out of the garage with a wrench in his hand and his MORTON FUEL OIL cap pulled low on his forehead, blood oozing through the grease on his knuckles.
I remember watching Ken MacKenzie introducing Popeye cartoons on The Mighty 90 Show, and how I was forced to give up the TV on the afternoons when Claire and her friends arrived, because they wanted to watch American Bandstand and see what the girls were wearing. I remember sunsets as red as the blood on my father’s knuckles, and how that makes me shiver now.
I remember a thousand other things, mostly good ones, but I didn’t sit down at my computer to put on rose-colored glasses and wax nostalgic.
Selective memory is one of the chief sins of the old, and I don’t have time for it. They were not all good things. We lived in the country, and back then, country life was hard. I suppose it still is.
My friend Al Knowles got his left hand caught in his father’s potato grader and lost three fingers before Mr. Knowles could get the balky, dangerous thing turned off. I was there that day, and remember how the belts turned red. I remember how Al screamed.
My father (along with Terry, his faithful if clueless acolyte) got the Road Rocket running—God, what a gorgeous, blasting clatter it made when he revved the engine!—and turned it over to Duane Robichaud, newly painted and with the number 19 emblazoned on its side, to race at the Speedway in Castle Rock. In the first lap of the first heat, the idiot rolled it and totaled it.
Duane walked away without a scratch. “Accelerator pedal must have stuck,” he said, grinning his foolish grin, only he said it ass-celerator, and my father said the only ass was the one behind the wheel. “That will teach you to ever trust anything valuable to a Robichaud,” my mother said, and my father stuffed his hands so deep into his pockets that the top of his underwear showed, perhaps to ensure they would not escape and go someplace they weren’t supposed to.
Lenny Macintosh, the postman’s son, lost an eye when he bent down to see why the cherry bomb he’d put in an empty pineapple tin didn’t go off.
When I'm asked (as I frequently am) what I consider to be the most frightening book I've ever written, the answer I give comes easily and with no hesitation: Pet Sematary.
It may not be the one that scares readers the most--based on the mail, I'd guess the one that does that is probably The Shining--but the fearbone, like the funnybone, is located in different places on different people.
All I know is that Pet Sematary is the one I put away in a drawer, thinking I had finally gone too far. Time suggests that I had not, at least in terms of what the public would accept, but certainly I had gone too far in terms of my own personal feelings. Put simply, I was horrified by what I had written, and the conclusions I'd drawn. I've told the story of how the book came to be written before, but I guess I can tell it one more time: last time pays for all.
In the late seventies, I was invited to spend a year at my alma mater, the University of Maine, as the writer in residence, and also teach a class in the literature of the fantastic (my lecture notes for that course formed the spine of Danse Macabre, which was published a year or two later).
My wife and I rented a house in Orrington, about twelve miles from the campus. It was a wonderful house in a wonderful rural Maine town. The only problem was the road we lived on. It was very busy, a lot of the traffic consisting of heavy tanker trucks from the chemical plant down the road.
Julio DeSanctis, who owned the store across the road from us, told me early on that my wife and I wanted to keep a close watch on our children, and on any pets our children might have.
"That road has used up a lot of animals," Julio said, a phrase that made its way into the story. And the proof of how many animals the road had used up was in the woods, beyond our rented house. A path led up through the neighboring field to a little pet cemetery in the woods . . . only the sign on the tree just outside this charming little makeshift graveyard read PET SEMATARY.
This phrase did more than just make it into the book; it became the title. There were dogs and cats buried up there, a few birds, even a goat.
Our daughter, who was eight or so at the time, had a cat named Smucky, and not long after we moved into the Orrington house, I found Smucky dead on the lawn of a house across the road.
The newest animal Route 5 had used up, it seemed, was my daughter's beloved pet. We buried Smucky in the pet sematary. My daughter made the grave marker, which read SMUCKY: HE WAS OBEDIANT. (Smucky wasn't in the least obedient, of course; he was a cat, for heaven's sake.)
All seemed to be well until that night, when I heard a thumping from the garage, accompanied by weeping and popping sounds like small firecrackers.
I went out to investigate and found my daughter, furious and beautiful in her grief. She had found several sheets of that blistered packing material in which fragile objects are sometimes shipped. She was jumping up and down on this, popping the blisters, and yelling, "He was my cat!" Let God have his own cat! Smucky was my cat!" Such anger,
I think, is the sanest first response to grief that a thinking, feeling human being can have, and I've always loved her for that defiant cry: Let God have his own cat! Right on, beautiful; right on. Our youngest son, then less than two years old, had only learned to walk, but already he was practicing his running skills. On a day not long after Smucky's demise, while we were out in the neighboring yard fooling around with a kite, our
toddler took it into his head to go running toward the road. I ran after him, and damned if I couldn't hear one of those Cianbro trucks coming (Orinco, in the novel). Either I caught him and pulled him down, or he tripped on his own; to this day, I'm not entirely sure which. When you're really scared, your memory often blanks out. All I know for sure is that he is still fine and well and in his young manhood.
But a part of my mind has never escaped from that gruesome what if: Suppose I hadn't caught him? Or suppose he had fallen in the middle of the road instead of on the edge of it? I think you can see why I found the book which rose out of these incidents so distressing. I simply took existing elements and threw in that one terrible what if. Put another way, I found myself not just thinking the unthinkable, but writing it down.
There was no writing space in the Orrington house, but there was an empty room in Julio's store, and it was there that I wrote Pet Sematary. On a day by day basis, I enjoyed the work, and I knew I was telling a "hot" story, one that engaged my attention and would engage the attention of readers, but when you're working day by day, you're not seeing the forest; you're only counting trees.
When I finished, I let the book rest six weeks, which is my way of working, and then read it over. I found the result so startling and so gruesome that I put the book in a drawer, thinking it would never be published. Not in my lifetime, anyway.
That it was published was a case of mere circumstance. I had ended my relationship with Doubleday, the publisher of my early books, but I owed them a final novel before accounts could be closed completely. I only had one in hand that wasn't spoken for, and that one was Pet Sematary.
I talked it over with my wife, who is my best counselor when I'm not sure how to proceed, and she told me that I should go ahead and publish the book. She thought it was good. Awful, but too good not to be read.
My early editor at Doubleday, Bill Thompson, had moved on by then (to Everest House, as a matter of fact; it was Bill who first suggested, then edited and published Danse Macabre), so I sent the book to Sam Vaughn, who was one of the editorial giants of the time.
It was Sam who made the final decision--he wanted to do the book. He edited it himself, giving particular attention to the book's conclusion, and his input turned a good book into an even better one.
I've always been grateful to him for his inspired blue pencil, and I've never been sorry that I did the book, although in many ways I still find it distressing and problematic. I'm particularly uneasy about the book's most resonant line, spoken by Louis Creed's elderly neighbor, Jud. "Sometimes, Louis," Jud says, "dead is better."
I hope with all my heart that that is not true, and yet within the nightmarish context of Pet Sematary, it seems to be. And it may be okay.
Perhaps "sometimes dead is better" is grief's last lesson, the one we get to when we finally tire of jumping up and down on the plastic blisters and crying out for God to get his own cat (or his own child) and leave ours alone.
That lesson suggests that in the end, we can only find peace in our human lives by accepting the will of the universe. That may sound like corny, new-age crap, but the alternative looks to me like a darkness too awful for such mortal creatures as us to bear. Louis Creed, who had lost his father at three and who had never known a grandfather, never expected to find a father as he entered his middle age, but that was exactly what happened
although he called this man a friend, as a grown man must do when he finds the man who should have been his father relatively late in life.
He met this man on the evening he and his wife and his two children moved into the big white frame house in Ludlow. Winston Churchill moved in with them. Church was his daughter Eileen's cat.
The search committee at the university had moved slowly, the hunt for a house within commuting distance of the university had been hair-raising, and by the time they neared the place where he believed the house to be--all the landmarks are right like the astrological signs the night before Caesar was assassinated, Louis thought morbidly--they were all tired and tense and on edge. Gage was cutting teeth and fussed almost ceaselessly.
He would not sleep, no matter how much Rachel sang to him. She offered him the breast even though it was off his schedule. Gage knew his dining schedule as well as she--better, maybe--and he promptly bit her with his new teeth.
Rachel, still not entirely sure about this move to Maine from Chicago, where she had lived her whole life, burst into tears. Eileen promptly joined her. In the back of the station wagon, Church continued to pace restlessly as he had done for the last three days it had taken them to drive here from Chicago.
His yowling from the cat kennel had been bad, but his restless pacing after they finally gave up and set him free in the car had been almost as unnerving. Louis himself felt a little like crying. A wild but not unattractive idea suddenly came to him: He would suggest that they go back to Bangor for something to eat while they waited for the moving van, and when his three hostages to fortune got out
he would floor the accelerator and drive away without so much as a look back, foot to the mat, the wagon's huge four-barrel carburetor gobbling expensive gasoline.
He would drive south, all the way to Orlando, Florida, where he would get a job at Disney World as a medic, under a new name. But before he hit the turnpike--big old 95 southbound--he would stop by the side of the road and put the fucking cat out too.
Then they rounded a final curve, and there was the house that only he had seen up until now. He had flown out and looked at each of the seven possibles they had picked from photos once the position at the University of Maine was solidly his, and this was the one he had chosen
a big old New England colonial (but newly sided and insulated; the heating costs, while horrible enough, were not out of line in terms of consumption), three big rooms downstairs, four more up, a long shed that might be converted to more rooms later on--all of it surrounded by a luxuriant sprawl of lawn, lushly green even in this August heat.
Beyond the house was a large field for the children to play in, and beyond the field were woods that went on damn near forever. The property abutted state lands, the realtor had explained, and there would be no development in the foreseeable future.
The remains of the Micmac Indian tribe had laid claim to nearly eight thousand acres in Ludlow and in the towns east of Ludlow, and the complicated litigation, involving the federal government as well as that of the state, might stretch into the next century.
But sometimes the sounds - like the pain - faded, and then there was only the haze. He remembered darkness solid darkness had come before the haze. Did that mean he was making progress?
Let there be light (even of the hazy variety), and the light was good, and so on and so on? Had those sounds existed in the darkness? He didn't know the answers to any of these questions.
Did it make sense to ask them? He didn't know the answer to that one, either The pain was somewhere below the sounds. The pain was east of the sun and south of his ears. That was all he did know.
For some length of time that seemed very long (and so was, since the pain and the stormy haze were the only two things which existed) those sounds were the only outer reality.
He had no idea who he was or where he was and cared to know neither. He wished he was dead, but through the pain-soaked haze that filled his mind like a summer storm-cloud, he did not know he wished it.
As time passed, he became aware that there were periods of non-pain, and that these had a cyclic quality. And for the first time since emerging from the total blackness which had prologued the haze, he had a thought which existed apart from whatever his current situation was.
This thought was of a broken-off piling which had jutted from the sand at Revere Beach. His mother and father had taken him to Revere Beach often when he was a kid, and he had always insisted that they spread their blanket where he could keep an eye on that piling, which looked to him like the single jutting fang of a buried monster.
He liked to sit and watch the water come up until it covered the piling. Then, hours later, after the sandwiches and potato salad had been eaten, after the last few drops of Kool-Aid had been coaxed from his father's big Thermos, just before his mother said it was time to pack up and start home
the top of the rotted piling would begin to show again - just a peek and flash between the incoming waves at first, then more and more. By the time their trash was stashed in the big drum with KEEP YOUR BEACH CLEAN stencilled on the side, Paulie's beach-toys picked up (that's my name Paulie I'm Paulie and tonight ma'll put Johnson's Baby Oil on my sunburn he thought inside the thunderhead where he now lived)
the blanket folded again, the piling had almost wholly reappeared, its blackish, slime-smoothed sides surrounded by sudsy scuds of foam.
It was the tide, his father had tried to explain, but he had always known it was the piling. The tide came and went; the piling stayed. It was just that sometimes you couldn't see it. Without the piling, there was no tide.
This memory circled and circled, maddening, like a sluggish fly. He groped for whatever it might mean, but for a long time the sounds interrupted.
His first really clear memory of this now, the now outside the storm-haze, was of stopping, of being suddenly aware he just couldn't pull another breath and that was all right, that was good, that was in fact just peachy-keen; he could take a certain level of pain but enough was enough and he was glad to be getting out of the game.
Then there was a mouth clamped over his, a mouth which was unmistakably a woman's mouth in spite of its hard spitless lips, and the wind from this woman's mouth blew into his own mouth and down his throat, puffing his lungs
and when the lips were pulled back he smelled his warder for the first time, smelled her on the outrush of the breath she had forced into him the way a man might force a part of himself into an unwilling woman a dreadful mixed stench of vanilla cookies and chocolate ice-cream and chicken gravy and peanut-butter fudge.
He heard a voice screaming, "Breathe, goddammit! Breathe, Paul!" The lips clamped down again. The breath blew down his throat again. Blew down it like the dank suck of wind which follows a fast subway train, pulling sheets of newspaper and candy-wrappers after it, and the lips were withdrawal, and he thought For Christ's sake don't let any of it out through your nose but he couldn't help it and oh that stink, that stink that fucking STINK.
"Breathe, goddam you!" the unseen voice shrieked, and he thought I will, anything, please just don't do that anymore, don't infect me anymore, and he tried, but before he could really get started her lips were clamped over his again, lips as dry and dead as strips of salted leather, and she raped him full of her air again.
When she took her lips away this time he did not let her breath out but pushed it and whooped in a gigantic breath of his own. Shoved it out.
Waited for his unseen chest to go up again on its own, as it had been doing his whole life without any help from him. When it didn't, he gave another giant whooping gasp, and then he was breathing again on his own, and doing it as fast as he could to flush the smell and taste of her out of him.
Normal air had never tasted so fine. He began to fade back into the haze again, but before the dimming world was gone entirely, he heard the woman's voice mutter: "Whew! That was a close one!" Not close enough, he thought, and fell asleep.
He dreamed of the piling, so real he felt he could almost reach out and slide his palm over its green-black fissured curve. When he came back to his former state of semi-consciousness, he was able to make the connection between the piling and his current situation - it seemed to float into his hand. The pain wasn't tidal.
That was the lesson of the dream which was really a memory. The pain only appeared to come and go. The pain was like the piling, sometimes covered and sometimes visible, but always there. When the pain wasn't harrying him through the deep stone grayness of his cloud, he was dumbly grateful, but he was no longer fooled - it was still there, waiting to return.
And there was not just one piling but two; the pain was the pilings, and part of him knew for a long time before most of his mind had knowledge of knowing that the shattered pilings were his own shattered legs. But it was still a long time before he was finally able to break the dried scum of saliva that had glued his lips together and croak out "Where am I?" to the woman who sat by his bed with a book in her hands. The name of the man who had written the book was Paul Sheldon.
He recognized it as his own with no surprise."Sidewinder, Colorado," she said when he was finally able to ask the question. "My name is Annie Wilkes. And I am - "_" I know," he said. "You're my number-one fan." "Yes," she said, smiling. "That's just what I am. "
Darkness. Then the pain and the haze. Then the awareness that, although the pain was constant, it was sometimes buried by an uneasy compromise which he supposed was relief. The first real memory: stopping, and being raped back into life by the woman's stinking breath.
Next real memory: her fingers pushing something into his mouth at regular intervals, something like Contac capsules, only since there was no water they only sat in his mouth and when they melted there was an incredibly bitter taste that was a little like the taste of aspirin.
It would have been good to spit that bitter taste out, but he knew better than to do it. Because it was that bitter taste which brought the high tide in over the piling.
These things all came at widely spaced intervals, but then as the pain itself began not to recede but to erode (as that Revere Beach piling must itself have eroded, he thought, because nothing is forever - although the child he had been would have scoffed at such heresy)
outside things began to impinge more rapidly until the objective world, with all its freight of memory, experience, and prejudice, had pretty much re-established itself.
He was Paul Sheldon, who wrote novels of two kinds, good ones and best-sellers. He had been married and divorced twice. He smoked too much (or had before all this, whatever "all this" was).
Something very bad had happened to him but he was still alive. That dark-gray cloud began to dissipate faster and faster.
It would be yet awhile before his number-one fan brought him the old clacking Royal with the grinning gapped mouth and the Ducky Daddles voice, but Paul understood long before then that he was in a hell of a jam.
That prescient part of his mind saw her before he knew he was seeing her, and must surely have understood her before he knew he was understanding her - why else did he associate such dour, ominous images with her?
Whenever she came into the room he thought of the graven images worshipped by superstitious African tribes in the novels of H. Rider Haggard, and stones, and doom. The image of Annie Wilkes as an African idol out of She or King Solomon's Mines was both ludicrous and queerly apt.
She was a big woman who, other than the large but unwelconiing swell of her bosom under the gray cardigan sweater she always wore, seemed to have no feminine curves at all there was no defined roundness of hip or buttock or even calf below the endless succession of wool skirts she wore in the house (she retired to her unseen bedroom to put on jeans before doing her outside chores).
Her body was big but not generous. There was a feeling about her of clots and roadblocks rather than welcoming orifices or even open spaces, areas of hiatus. Most of all she gave him a disturbing sense of solidity, as if she might not have any blood vessels or even internal organs; as if she might be only solid Annie Wilkes from side to side and top to bottom.
He felt more and more convinced that her eyes, which appeared to move, were actually just painted on, and they moved no more than the eyes of portraits which appear to follow you to wherever you move in the room where they hang.
It seemed to him that if he made the first two fingers of his hand into a V and attempted to poke them up her nostrils, they might go less than an eighth of an inch before encountering a solid (if slightly yielding) obstruction; that even her gray cardigan and frumpy house skirts and faded outside-work jeans were part of that solid fibrous unchannelled body.
So his feeling that she was like an idol in a perfervid novel was not really surprising at all. Like an idol, she gave only one thing: a feeling of unease deepening steadily toward terror. Like an idol, she took everything else. No, wait, that wasn't quite fair. She did give something else. She gave him the pills that brought the tide in over the pilings.
The pills were the tide; Annie Wilkes was the lunar presence which pulled them into his mouth like jetsam on a wave. She brought him two every six hours, first announcing her presence only as a pair of fingers poking into his mouth (and soon enough he learned to suck eagerly at those poking fingers in spite of the bitter taste), later appearing in her cardigan sweater and one of her half-dozen skirts, usually with a paperback copy of one of his novels tucked under her arm.
At night she appeared to him in a fuzzy pink robe, her face shiny with some sort of cream (he could have named the main ingredient easily enough even though he had never seen the bottle from which she tipped it;
the sheepy smell of the lanolin was strong and proclamatory), shaking him out of his frowzy, dream-thick sleep with the pills nestled in her hand and the poxy moon nestled in the window over one of her solid shoulders.
After awhile - after his alarm had become too great to be ignored - he was able to find out what she was feeding him. It was a pain-killer with a heavy codeine base called Novril. He thought, as he still did every so often, of how he had stripped Deenie's wallet of cash, and how the little boy had reached for the cocaine on the coffee table.
The reason she had to bring him the bedpan so infrequently was not only because he was on a diet consisting entirely of liquids and gelatines (earlier, when he was in the cloud, she had fed him intravenously)
but also because Novril had a tendency to cause constipation in patients taking it. Another side-effect, a rather more serious one, was respiratory depression in sensitive patients.
Paul was not particularly sensitive, even though he had been a heavy smoker for nearly eighteen years, but his breathing had stopped nonetheless on at least one occasion (there might have been others, in the haze, that he did not remember).
That was the time she gave him mouth-to-mouth. It might have just been one of those things which happened, but he later came to suspect she had nearly killed him with an accidental overdose. She didn't know as much about what she was doing as she believed she did. That was only one of the things about Annie that scared him.
He discovered three things almost simultaneously, about ten days after having emerged from the dark cloud. The first was that Annie Wilkes had a great deal of Novril (she had in fact, a great many drugs of all kinds). The second was that he was hooked on Novril. The third was that Annie Wilkes was dangerously crazy.
The darkness had prologued the pain and the storm-cloud; he began to remember what had prologued the darkness as she told him what had happened to him. This was shortly, after he had asked the traditional when-the-sleeper-wakes question and she had told him he was in the little town of Sidewinder, Colorado.
In addition she told him that she had read each of his eight novels at least twice, and had read her very favorites, the Misery novels, four, five, maybe six times. She only wished he would write them faster. She said she had hardly been able to believe that her patient was really that Paul Sheldon even after checking the ID in his wallet.
"Where is my wallet, by the way?" he asked. "I've kept it safe for you," she said. Her smile suddenly collapsed into a narrow watchfulness he didn't like much - it was like discovering a deep crevasse almost obscured by summer flowers in the midst of a smiling, jocund meadow. "Did you think I'd steal something out of it?"
"No, of course not. It's just that - " It's just that the rest of my life is in it, he thought. My life outside this room. Outside the pain.
Outside the way time seems to stretch out like the long pink string of bubble-gum a kid pulls out of his mouth when he's bored. Because that's how it is in the last hour or so before the pills come.
"Just what, Mister Man?" she persisted, and he saw with alarm that the narrow look was growing blacker and blacker. He could hear the steady, keen whine of the wind outside, and he had a sudden image of her picking him up and throwing him over her solid shoulder, where he would lie like a burlap sack slung over a stone wall, and taking him outside, and heaving him into a snowdrift.
He would freeze to death, but before he did, his legs would throb and scream. The crevasse was spreading, as if an earthquake was going on behind her brow. "It's just that my father always told me to keep my eye on my wallet," he said, astonished by how easily this lie came out.
His father had made a career out of not noticing Paul any more than he absolutely had to, and had, so far as Paul could remember, offered him only a single piece of advice in his entire life.
On Paul's fourteenth birthday his father had given him a Red Devil condom in a foil envelope. "Put that in your wallet," Roger Sheldon said, "and if you ever get excited while you're making out at the drive-in, take a second between excited enough to want to and too excited to care and slip that on.
Too many bastards in the world already, and I don't want to see you going in the Army at sixteen. " Now Paul went on: "I guess he told me to keep my eye on my wallet so many times that it's stuck inside for good.
If I offended you, I'm truly sorry. " She relaxed. Smiled. The crevasse closed. Summer flowers nodded cheerfully once again. He thought of pushing his hand through that smile and encountering nothing but flexible darkness. "No offense taken. It's in a safe place.
Wait - I've got something for you. " She left and returned with a steaming bowl of soup. There were vegetables floating in it. He was not able to eat much but he ate more than he thought at first he could. She seemed pleased.
It was while he ate the soup that she told him what had happened, and he remembered it all as she told him and he supposed it was good to know how you happened to end up with your legs shattered but the manner by which he was coming to this knowledge was disquieting - it was as if he was a character in a story or a play, a character whose history is not recounted like history but created like fiction.
In a New Jersey town, on the west bank of the Hudson River, there's a park named for the town's most famous resident. On a clear day, it offers a perfect view of Lower Manhattan. The True Knot arrived in Hoboken on September eighth, parking in a private lot which they had four-walled for ten days. Crow Daddy did the deal. Handsome and gregarious, looking about forty,
Crow's favorite t-shirt read I'M A PEOPLE PERSON! Not that he ever wore a tee when negotiating for the True Knot; then it was strictly suit and tie. It was what the rubes expected. His straight name was Henry Rothman. He was a Harvard-educated lawyer (class of '38), and he always carried cash.
The True had over a billion dollars in various accounts across the world--some in gold, some in diamonds, some in rare books, stamps, and paintings--but never paid by check or credit card. Everyone, even Pea and Pod, who looked like kids, carried a roll of ten and twenties.
As Jimmy Numbers had once said, "We're a cash-and-carry outfit. We pay cash and the rubes carry us." Jimmy was the True's accountant. In his rube days he had once ridden with an outfit that became known (long after their war was over) as Quantrill's Raiders.
Back then he had been a wild kid who wore a buffalo coat and carried a Sharps, but in the years since, he had mellowed. These days he had a framed, autographed picture of Ronald Reagan in his RV.
On the morning of September eleventh, the True watched the attacks on the Twin Towers from the parking lot, passing around four pairs of binoculars. They would have had a better view from Sinatra Park, but Rose didn't need to tell them that gathering early might attract suspicion and in the months and years ahead, America was going to be a very suspicious nation: if you see something, say something.
Around ten that morning--when crowds had gathered all along the riverbank and it was safe--they made their way to the park. The Little twins, Pea and Pod, pushed Grampa Flick in his wheelchair. Grampa wore his cap stating I AM A VET. His long, baby-fine white hair floated around the cap's edges like milkweed. There had been a time when he'd told folks he was a veteran of the Spanish-American War. Then it was World War I. Nowadays it was World War II.
In another twenty years or so, he expected to switch his story to Vietnam. Verisimilitude had never been a problem; Grampa was a military history buff. Sinatra Park was jammed. Most folks were silent, but some wept. Apron Annie and Black-Eyed Sue helped in this respect; both were able to cry on demand. The others put on suitable expressions of sorrow, solemnity, and amazement.
Basically, the True Knot fit right in. It was how they rolled. Spectators came and went, but the True stayed for most of the day, which was cloudless and beautiful (except for the thick billows of dreck rising in Lower Manhattan, that is).
They stood at the iron rail, not talking among themselves, just watching. And taking long slow deep breaths, like tourists from the Midwest standing for the first time on Pemaquid Point or Quoddy Head in Maine, breathing deep of the fresh sea air. As a sign of respect, Rose took off her tophat and held it by her side.
They would return the next day, and the day after that, and the day after that. They would return until the good steam was exhausted, and then they would move on again. By then, Grampa Flick's white hair would have become iron gray, and he would no longer need the wheelchair. At four o'clock they trooped back to their encampment in the parking lot, invigorated.
It was a twenty-mile drive from Frazier to North Conway, but Dan Torrance made it every Thursday night, partly because he could. He was now working at Helen Rivington House, making a decent salary, and he had his driver's license back.
The car he'd bought to go with it wasn't much, just a three-year-old Caprice with blackwall tires and an iffy radio, but the engine was good and every time he started it up, he felt like the luckiest man in New Hampshire.
He thought if he never had to ride another bus, he could die happy. It was January of 2004. Except for a few random thoughts and images--plus the extra work he sometimes did at the hospice, of course--the shining had been quiet.
He would have done that volunteer work in any case, but after his time in AA, he also saw it as making amends, which recovering people considered almost as important as staying away from the first drink. If he could manage to keep the plug in the jug another three months, he would be able to celebrate three years sober.
Driving again figured large in the daily gratitude meditations upon which Casey K. insisted (because, he said--and with all the dour certainty of the Program long-timer--a grateful alcoholic doesn't get drunk), but mostly Dan went on Thursday nights because the Big Book gathering was soothing. Intimate, really.
Some of the open discussion meetings in the area were uncomfortably large, but that was never true on Thursday nights in North Conway. There was an old AA saying that went, If you want to hide something from an alcoholic, stick it in the Big Book, and attendance at the North Conway Thursday night meeting suggested that there was some truth in it.
Even during the weeks between the Fourth of July and Labor Day--the height of the tourist season--it was rare to have more than a dozen people in the Amvets hall when the gavel fell. As a result, Dan had heard things he suspected would never have been spoken aloud in the meetings that drew fifty or even seventy recovering alkies and druggies.
In those, speakers had a tendency to take refuge in the platitudes (of which there were hundreds) and avoid the personal. You'd hear Serenity pays dividends and You can take my inventory if you're willing to make my amends, but never I fucked my brother's wife one night when we were both drunk.
At the Thursday night We Study Sobriety meetings, the little enclave read Bill Wilson's big blue how-to manual from cover to cover, each new meeting picking up where the last meeting had left off. When they got to the end of the book, they went back to "The Doctor's Statement" and started all over again. Most meetings covered ten pages or so. That took about half an hour.
In the remaining half hour, the group was supposed to talk about the material just read. Sometimes they actually did. Quite often, however, the discussion veered off in other directions, like an unruly planchette scurrying around a Ouija board beneath the fingers of neurotic teenagers.
Dan remembered a Thursday night meeting he'd attended when he was about eight months sober. The chapter under discussion, "To Wives," was full of antique assumptions that almost always provoked a hot response from the younger women in the Program.
They wanted to know why, in the sixty-five years or so since the Big Book's original publication, no one had ever added a chapter called "To Husbands." When Gemma T.--a thirtysomething whose only two emotional settings seemed to be Angry and Profoundly Pissed Off--raised her hand on that particular night, Dan had expected a fem-lib tirade.
Instead she said, much more quietly than usual, "I need to share something. I've been holding onto it ever since I was seventeen, and unless I let go, I'll never be able to stay away from coke and wine."
"I hit a man with my car when I was coming home drunk from a party," Gemma said. "This was back in Somerville. I left him lying by the side of the road. I didn't know if he was dead or alive. I still don't. I waited for the cops to come and arrest me, but they never did. I got away with it."
She had laughed at this the way people do when the joke's an especially good one, then put her head down on the table and burst into sobs so deep that they shook her rail-thin body. It had been Dan's first experience with how terrifying "honesty in all our affairs" could be when it was actually put into practice.
He was a little in awe of Gemma, but that much raw honesty wasn't in him. If it came down to a choice between telling that story and taking a drink. Tonight the reading was "Gutter Bravado," one of the stories from the section of the Big Book cheerily titled "They Lost Nearly All."
The tale followed a pattern with which Dan had become familiar: good family, church on Sundays, first drink, first binge, business success spoiled by booze, escalating lies, first arrest, broken promises to reform, institutionalization, and the final happy ending.
All the stories in the Big Book had happy endings. That was part of its charm.It was a cold night but overwarm inside, and Dan was edging into a doze when Doctor John raised his hand and said, "I've been lying to my wife about something, and I don't know how to stop."
That woke Dan up. He liked DJ a lot.It turned out that John's wife had given him a watch for Christmas, quite an expensive one, and when she had asked him a couple of nights ago why he wasn't wearing it, John said he'd left it at the office. "Only it's not there. I looked everywhere, and it's just not. I do a lot of hospital rounds, and if I have to change into scrubs, I use one of the lockers in the doctors' lounge.
There are combo locks, but I hardly ever use them, because I don't carry much cash and I don't have anything else worth stealing. Except for the watch, I guess. I can't remember taking it off and leaving it in a locker--not at CNH or over in Bridgton--but I think I must have.
It's not the expense. It just brings back a lot of the old stuff from the days when I was drinking myself stupid every night and chipping speed the next morning to get going." There were nodding heads at this, followed by similar stories of guilt-driven deceit. No one gave advice; that was called "crosstalk," and frowned on. They simply told their tales.
John listened with his head down and his hands clasped between his knees. After the basket was passed ("We are self-supporting through our own contributions"), he thanked everyone for their input. From the look of him, Dan didn't think said input had helped a whole hell of a lot.
After the Lord's Prayer, Dan put away the leftover cookies and stacked the group's tattered Big Books in the cabinet marked FOR AA USE. A few people were still hanging around the butt-can outside--the so-called meeting after the meeting--but he and John had the kitchen to themselves. Dan hadn't spoken during the discussion; he was too busy having an interior debate with himself.
The shining had been quiet, but that didn't mean it was absent. He knew from his volunteer work that it was actually stronger than it had been since childhood, though now he seemed to have a greater degree of control over it. That made it less frightening and more useful. His co-workers at Rivington House knew he had something, but most of them called it empathy and let it go at that.
The last thing he wanted, now that his life had begun to settle down, was to get a reputation as some sort of parlor psychic. Best to keep the freaky shit to himself. Doctor John was a good guy, though. And he was hurting. "Well, I'm off. See you next week, I guess."
DJ placed the coffee urn upside down in the dish drainer, used a length of towel hanging from the stove handle to dry his hands, then turned to Dan, offering a smile that looked as real as the Coffee-mate Dan had stored away next to the cookies and the sugar bowl. In the end, the decision made itself; Dan simply could not let the guy go looking like that. He held his arms out. "Give it up."
The fabled AA manhug. Dan had seen many but never given a single one. John looked dubious for a moment, then stepped forward. Dan drew him in, thinking There'll probably be nothing. But there was. It came as quickly as it had when, as a child, he had sometimes helped his mother and father find lost things.
Bobo shortleashed his dogs again. They were valuable, and he had no intention of losing them to the psychopath howling and gibbering just down yonder. The other men reloaded their guns and snapped them closed. That howling had chilled them all, and made the sweat under their arms and running down their backs feel like icewater. When men take a chill like that, they need a leader if they are to go on, and Deputy McGee led them.
He got out in front and walked briskly (I bet he didn't feel very brisk right then, though) to a stand of alders that jutted out of the woods on the right, with the rest of them trundling along nervously about five paces behind. He paused just once, and that was to motion the biggest man among them--Sam Hollis--to keep near Klaus Detterick.
On the other side of the alders there was more open ground stretching back to the woods on the right. On the left was the long, gentle slope of the riverbank. They all stopped where they were, thunderstruck.
I think they would have given a good deal to unsee what was before them, and none of them would ever forget it--it was the sort of nightmare, bald and almost smoking in the sun, that lies beyond the drapes and furnishings of good and ordinary lives--church suppers, walks along country lanes, honest work, love-kisses in bed.
There is a skull in every man, and I tell you there is a skull in the lives of all men. They saw it that day, those men--they saw what sometimes grins behind the smile.
Sitting on the riverbank in a faded, bloodstained jumper was the biggest man any of them had ever seen--John Coffey. His enormous, splay-toed feet were bare. On his head he wore a faded red bandanna, the way a country woman would wear a kerchief into church.
Gnats circled him in a black cloud. Curled in each arm was the body of a naked girl. Their blonde hair, once curly and light as milkweed fluff, was now matted to their heads and streaked red.
The man holding them sat bawling up at the sky like a moonstruck calf, his dark brown cheeks slicked with tears, his face twisted in a monstrous cramp of grief.
He drew breath in hitches, his chest rising until the snaps holding the straps of his jumper were strained, and then let that vast catch of air out in another of those howls. So often you read in the paper that "the killer showed no remorse," but that wasn't the case here.
John Coffey was torn open by what he had done but he would live. The girls would not. They had been torn open in a more fundamental way.
No one seemed to know how long they stood there, looking at the howling man who was, in his turn, looking across the great still plate of the river at a train on the other side, storming down the tracks toward the trestle that crossed the river.
It seemed they looked for an hour or for forever, and yet the train got no farther along, it seemed to storm only in one place, like a child doing a tantrum, and the sun did not go behind a cloud, and the sight was not blotted from their eyes.
It was there before them, as real as a dogbite. The black man rocked back and forth; Cora and Kathe rocked with him like dolls in the arms of a giant.
The bloodstained muscles in the man's huge, bare arms flexed and relaxed, flexed and relaxed, flexed and relaxed.
It was Klaus Detterick who broke the tableau. Screaming, he flung himself at the monster who had raped and killed his daughters. Sam Hollis knew his job and tried to do it, but couldn't.
He was six inches taller than Klaus and outweighed him by at least seventy pounds, but Klaus seemed to almost shrug his encircling arms off. Klaus flew across the intervening open ground and launched a flying kick at Coffey's head.
His workboot, caked with spilled milk that had already soured in the heat, scored a direct hit on Coffey's left temple, but Coffey seemed not to feel it at all. He only sat there, keening and rocking and looking out across the river;
the way I imagine it, he could almost have been a picture out of some piney woods Pentecostal sermon, the faithful follower of the Cross looking out toward Goshen Land . . . if not for the corpses, that was.
It took four men to haul the hysterical farmer off John Coffey, and he fetched Coffey I don't know how many good licks before they finally did. It didn't seem to matter to Coffey, one way or the other; he just went on looking out across the river and keening.
As for Detterick, all the fight went out of him when he was finally pulled off--as if some strange galvanizing current had been running through the huge black man (I still have a tendency to think in electrical metaphors;
you'll have to pardon me), and when Detterick's contact with that power source was finally broken, he went as limp as a man flung back from a live wire. He knelt wide-legged on the riverbank with his hands to his face, sobbing. Howie joined him and they hugged each other forehead to forehead.
Two men watched them while the rest formed a rifle-toting ring around the rocking, wailing black man. He still seemed not to realize that anyone but him was there. McGee stepped forward, shifted uncertainly from foot to foot for a bit, then hunkered.
"Mister," he said in a quiet voice, and Coffey hushed at once. McGee looked at eyes that were bloodshot from crying. And still they streamed, as if someone had left a faucet on inside him.
Those eyes wept, and yet were somehow untouched . . . distant and serene. I thought them the strangest eyes I had ever seen in my life, and McGee felt much the same. "Like the eyes of an animal that never saw a man before," he told a reporter named Hammersmith just before the trial.
She kissed my forehead right over my left eyebrow, which always gives me the prickles . . . as Janice well knew. "Poor baby. As if that awful Percy Wetmore wasn't enough. Come to bed soon."
I did, but before I did, I stepped out onto the back porch to empty out (and checked the wind direction with a wet thumb before I did--what our parents tell us when we are small seldom goes ignored, no matter how foolish it may be).
Peeing outdoors is one joy of country living the poets never quite got around to, but it was no joy that night; the water coming out of me burned like a line of lit coal-oil. Yet I thought it had been a little worse that afternoon, and knew it had been worse the two or three days before.
I had hopes that maybe I had started to mend. Never was a hope more ill-founded. No one had told me that sometimes a bug that gets up inside there, where it's warm and wet, can take a day or two off to rest before coming on strong again. I would have been surprised to know it.
I would have been even more surprised to know that, in another fifteen or twenty years, there would be pills you could take that would smack that sort of infection out of your system in record time
while those pills might make you feel a little sick at your stomach or loose in your bowels, they almost never made you vomit the way Dr.
Sadler's sulfa pills did. Back in '32, there wasn't much you could do but wait, and try to ignore that feeling that someone had spilled coal-oil inside your works and then touched a match to it.
I finished my butt, went into the bedroom, and finally got to sleep. I dreamed of girls with shy smiles and blood in their hair.
THE NEXT MORNING there was a pink memo slip on my desk, asking me to stop by the warden's office as soon as I could. I've always thought this "get-it-over-with" business was overrated.
I knew what that was about--there were unwritten but very important rules to the game, and I had stopped playing by them for awhile yesterday--and so I put it off as long as possible. Like going to the doctor about my waterworks problem, I suppose.
Anyway, I didn't hurry to Warden Moores's office. I stripped off my wool uniform coat instead, hung it over the back of my chair, and turned on the fan in the corner--it was another hot one.
Then I sat down and went over Brutus Howell's night-sheet. There was nothing there to get alarmed about. Delacroix had wept briefly after turning in--he did most nights, and more for himself than for the folks he had roasted alive, I am quite sure--and then had taken Mr. Jingles, the mouse, out of the cigar box he slept in.
That had calmed Del, and he had slept like a baby the rest of the night. Mr. Jingles had most likely spent it on Delacroix's stomach, with his tail curled over his paws, eyes unblinking. It was as if God had decided Delacroix needed a guardian angel, but had decreed in His wisdom that only a mouse would do for a rat like our homicidal friend from Louisiana.
Not all that was in Brutal's report, of course, but I had done enough night watches myself to fill in the stuff between the lines. There was a brief note about Coffey: "Laid awake, mostly quiet, may have cried some. I tried to get some talk started, but after a few grunted replies from Coffey, gave up. Paul or Harry may have better luck."
"Getting the talk started" was at the center of our job, really. I didn't know it then, but looking back from the vantage point of this strange old age (I think all old ages seem strange to the folk who must endure them)
I understand that it was, and why I didn't see it then--it was too big, as central to our work as our respiration was to our lives.
It wasn't important that the floaters be good at "getting the talk started," but it was vital for me and Harry and Brutal and Dean and it was one reason why Percy Wetmore was such a disaster.
The inmates hated him, the guards hated him everyone hated him, presumably, except for his political connections, Percy himself, and maybe (but only maybe) his mother. He was like a dose of white arsenic sprinkled into a wedding cake, and I think I knew he spelled disaster from the start. He was an accident waiting to happen.
As for the rest of us, we would have scoffed at the idea that we functioned most usefully not as the guards of the condemned but as their psychiatrists--part of me still wants to scoff at that idea today--but we knew about getting the talk started and without the talk, men facing Old Sparky had a nasty habit of going insane.
I made a note at the bottom of Brutal's report to talk to John Coffey--to try, at least--and then passed on to a note from Curtis Anderson, the warden's chief assistant. It said that he, Anderson, expected a DOE order for Edward Delacrois (Anderson's misspelling; the man's name was actually Eduard Delacroix) very soon.
DOE stood for date of execution, and according to the note, Curtis had been told on good authority that the little Frenchman would take the walk shortly before Halloween--October 27th was his best guess, and Curtis Anderson's guesses were very informed.
"Crazy-wild and proud of it. Has rambled all over the state for the last year or so, and has hit the big time at last. Killed three people in a holdup, one a pregnant woman, killed a fourth in the getaway. State Patrolman. All he missed was a nun and a blind man."
I smiled a little at that. "Wharton is 19 years old, has Billy the Kid tattooed on upper l. forearm. You will have to slap his nose a time or two, I guarantee you that, but be careful when you do it.
This man just doesn't care." He had underlined this last sentiment twice, then finished: "Also, he may be a hang-arounder. He's working appeals, and there's the fact that he is a minor." A crazy kid, working appeals, apt to be around for awhile. Oh, that all sounded just fine. Suddenly the day seemed hotter than ever, and I could no longer put off seeing Warden Moores.
I worked for three wardens during my years as a Cold Mountain guard; Hal Moores was the last and best of them. In a walk. Honest, straightforward, lacking even Curtis Anderson's rudimentary wit, but equipped with just enough political savvy to keep his job during those grim years
and enough integrity to keep from getting seduced by the game. He would not rise any higher, but that seemed all right with him. He was fifty-eight or -nine back then, with a deeply lined bloodhound face that Bobo Marchant probably would have felt right at home with.
He had white hair and his hands shook with some sort of palsy, but he was strong. The year before, when a prisoner had rushed him in the exercise yard with a shank whittled out of a crate-slat Moores had stood his ground, grabbed the skatehound's wrist, and had twisted it so hard that the snapping bones had sounded like dry twigs burning in a hot fire.
The skatehound, all his grievances forgotten, had gone down on his knees in the dirt and begun screaming for his mother. "I'm not her," Moores said in his cultured Southern voice, "but if I was, I'd raise up my skirts and piss on you from the loins that gave you birth."
Carrie went into the house and closed the door behind her. Bright daylight disappeared and was replaced by brown shadows, coolness, and the oppressive smell of talcum powder. The only sound was the ticking of the Black Forest cuckoo clock in the living room.
Momma had gotten the cuckoo clock with Green Stamps. Once, in the sixth grade, Carrie had set out to ask Momma if Green Stamps weren't sinful, but her nerve had failed her. She walked up the hall and put her coat in the closet. A luminous picture above the coathooks limned a ghostly Jesus hovering grimly over a family seated at the kitchen table. Beneath was the caption (also luminous): The Unseen Guest.
She went into the living room and stood in the middle of the faded, starting-to-be-threadbare rug. She closed her eyes and watched the little dots flash by in the darkness. Her headache thumped queasily behind her temples.
Momma worked on the speed ironer and folder down at the Blue Ribbon Laundry in Chamberlain Centre. She had worked there since Carrie was five, when the compensation and insurance that had resulted from her father's accident had begun to run out. Her hours were from seven-thirty in the morning until four in the afternoon. The laundry was Godless. Momma had told her so many times. The foreman, Mr Elton Mott, was especially Godless.
Momma said that Satan had reserved a special blue corner of Hell for Elt, as he was called at the Blue Ribbon. Alone. She opened her eyes. The living room contained two chairs with straight backs. There was a sewing table with a light where Carrie sometimes made dresses in the evening while Momma tatted doilies and talked about The Coming. The Black Forest cuckoo clock was on the far wall.
There were many religious pictures, but the one Carrie liked best was on the wall above her chair. It was Jesus leading lambs on a hill that was as green and smooth as the Riverside golf course. Noah's ark floating above the agonized, drowning sinners, Lot and his family fleeing the great burning of Sodom and Gomorrah.
The others were not as tranquil: Jesus turning the money-changers from the temple, Moses throwing the Tablets down upon the worshippers of the golden calf, Thomas the Doubter putting his hand on Christ's wounded side (oh, the horrified fascination of that one and the nightmares it had given her as a girl!)
On a small deal table there were a lamp and a stack of tracts. The top pamphlet showed a sinner (his spiritual status was obvious from the agonized expression on his face) trying to crawl beneath a large boulder. The title blared: Neither shall the rock hide him ON THAT DAY!
But the room was actually dominated by a huge plaster crucifix on the far wall, fully four feet high. Momma had mail-ordered it special from St Louis. The Jesus impaled upon it was frozen in a grotesque, muscle-straining rictus of pain, mouth drawn down in a groaning curve.
His crown of thorns bled scarlet streams down temples and forehead. The eyes were turned up in a medieval expression of slanted agony. Both hands were also drenched with blood and the feet were nailed to a small plaster platform.
This corpus had also given Carrie endless nightmares in which the mutilated Christ chased her through dream corridors, holding a mallet and nails, begging her to take up her cross and follow Him. Just lately these dreams had evolved into something less understandable but more sinister. The object did not seem to be murder but something even more awful. Alone.
The pain in her legs and belly and privates had drained away a little. She no longer thought she was bleeding to death. The word was menstruation, and all at once it seemed logical and inevitable.
It was her Time of the Month. She giggled a strange, affrighted giggle in the solemn stillness of the flying room. It sounded like a quiz show.
You too can win an all-expenses-paid trip to Bermuda on Time of the Month. Like the memory of the stones, the knowledge of menstruation seemed always to have been there, blocked but waiting.
She turned and walked heavily upstairs. The bathroom had a wooden floor that had been scrubbed nearly white (Cleanliness is next to Godliness) and a tub on claw feet. Rust stains dripped down the porcelain below the chrome spout, and there was no shower attachment. Momma said showers were sinful.
Carrie went in, opened the towel cabinet, and began to hunt purposefully but carefully, not leaving anything out of place. Momma's eyes were sharp. The blue box was in the very back, behind the old towels they didn't use any more. There was a fuzzily silhouetted woman in a long, filmy gown on the side.
She took one of the napkins out and looked at it curiously. She had blotted the lipstick she stuck into her purse quite openly with these - once on a street corner. Now she remembered (or imagined she did) quizzical, shocked looks. Her face flamed. They had told her. The flush faded to a milky anger.
She went into her tiny bedroom. There were many more religious pictures here, but there were more lambs and fewer scenes of righteous wrath. A Ewen pennant was tacked over the dresser. On the dresser itself was a Bible and a plastic Jesus that glowed in the dark.
She undressed - first her blouse, then her hateful kneelength skirt, her slip, her girdle, her pettipants, her garter belt, her stockings, She looked at the pile of heavy clothes, their buttons and rubber, with an expression of fierce wretchedness.
In the school library there was a stack of back issues of Seventeen and often she leafed through them, pasting an expression of idiotic casualness on her face. The models looked so easy and smooth in their short, kicky skirts, pantyhose, and frilly underwear with patterns on them.
Of course easy was one of Momma's pet words (she knew what Momma would say to a question) to describe them. And it would make her dreadfully self-conscious, she knew that. Naked, evil, blackened with the sin of exhibitionism, the breeze blowing lewdly up the backs of her legs, inciting lust.
And she knew that they would know how she felt. They always did. They would embarrass her somehow, push her savagely back into clowndom. It was their way. She could, she knew she could be in another place. She was thick through the waist only because sometimes she felt so miserable, empty, bored, that the only way to fill that gaping, whistling hole was to eat and eat and eat-but she was not that thick through the middle.
Her body chemistry would not allow her to go beyond a certain point. And she thought her legs were actually pretty, almost as pretty as Sue Snell's or Vicky Hanscom's. She could stop the chocolates and her pimples would go down. They always did. She could fix her hair.
Buy pantyhose and blue and green tights. Make little skirts and dresses from Butterick and Simplicity patterns. The price of a bus ticket, a train ticket. She could be, could be, could be Alive. She unsnapped her heavy cotton bra and let it fall. Her breasts were milk-white, upright and smooth. The nipples were a light coffee colour. She ran her hands over them and a little shiver went through her. Evil, bad, oh it was.
Momma had told her there was Something. The Something was dangerous, ancient, unutterably evil. It could make you Feeble. Watch, Momma said. It comes at night. It will make you think of the evil that goes on in parking lots and roadhouses.
But, though this was only nine-twenty in the morning, Carrie thought that the Something had come to her. She ran her hands over her breasts (dirtypillows) again, and the skin was cool but the nipples were hot and hard, and when she tweaked one it made her feel weak and dissolving.
Yes, this was the Something. Her underpants were spotted with blood. Suddenly she felt that she must burst into tears, scream, or rip the Something out of her body whole and, beating, crush it, kill it.
The napkin Miss Desjardin had fixed was already wilting and she changed it carefully, knowing how bad she was, how bad they were, how she hated them and herself. Only Momma was good. Momma had battled the Black Man and had vanquished him.
Carrie had seen it happen in a dream. Momma had driven him out of the front door with a broom, and the Black Man had fled up Carlin Street into the night, his cloven feet striking red sparks from the cement.
Her momma had torn the Something out of herself and was pure. Carrie hated her.She caught a glimpse of her own face in the tiny mirror she had hung on the back of the door, a mirror with a cheap green plastic rim, good only for combing hair by.
She hated her face, her dull, stupid, bovine face, the vapid eyes, the red, shiny pimples, the nests of black heads. She hated her face most of all. The reflection was suddenly split by a jagged, silvery crack. The mirror fell on the floor and shattered at her feet, leaving only the plastic ring to stare at her like a blinded eye.
From Ogilvie's Dictionary of Physic Phenomena: Telekinesis is the ability to move objects or to cause changes in objects by force of the mind.
The phenomenon has most reliably been reported in times of crisis or in stress situations, when automobiles have been levitated from pinned bodies or debris from collapsed buildings, etc.
The phenomenon is often confused with the work of poltergeists, which are playful spirits. It should be noted that poltergeists are astral beings of questionable reality, while telekinesis is thought to be an empiric function of the mind, possibly electrochemical in nature
When they had finished making love, as she slowly put her clothes in order in the back seat of Tommy Ross's 1963 Ford, Sue Snell found her thoughts turning back to Carrie White.
It was Friday night and Tommy (who was still looking pensively out the back window with his pants still down around his ankles; the effect was comic but oddly endearing) had taken her bowling. That, of course, was a mutually accepted excuse. Fornication had been on their minds from the word go.
She had been going out more or less steadily with Tommy ever since October (it was now May) and they had been lovers for only two weeks. Seven times, she amended.
The first time had hurt like hell. Her girl friends, Helen Shyres and Jeanne Gault, had both done It, and they both assured her that it only hurt for a minute - like getting a shot of penicillin - and then it was roses.
But for Sue, the first time had been like being reamed out with a hoe handle. Tommy had confessed to her since, with a grin, that he had gotten the rubber on wrong, too. Tonight had been the seventh. There had been no fireworks yet, no bands playing 'Stars and Stripes Forever,' but it had gotten a little better.
Tonight was only the second time she had begun to feel something like pleasure, and then it was over. Tommy had held out for as long as he could, but then it was just. . . over. It seemed like an awful lot of rubbing for a little warmth.
In the aftermath she felt low and melancholy, and her thoughts turned to Carrie in this light. A wave of remorse caught her with all emotional guards down, and when Tommy turned back from the view of Brickyard Rill, she was crying.
'Hey,' he said, alarmed. 'Oh, hey. ' He held her clumsily. 'It's all right,' she said still weeping. 'It's not you. I did a not-so-good thing today. I was just thinking of it. ' 'What?' He patted the back of her neck gently. So she found herself launching into the story of that morning's incident, hardly believing it was herself she was listening to.
Facing the thing frankly, she realized the main reason she had allowed Tommy to have her was because she was in (love? infatuation? didn't matter results were the same) with him, and now to put herself in this position-cohort in a nasty shower-room joke-was hardly the approved method to hook a fellow.
And Tommy was, of course, Popular. As someone who had been Popular herself all her life, it had almost seemed written that she would meet and fall in love with someone as Popular as she.
They were almost certain to be voted King and Queen of the highschool Spring Ball, and the senior class had already voted them class couple for the yearbook. They had become a fixed star in the shifting firmament of the high school's relationships, the acknowledged Romeo and Juliet.
And she knew with sudden hatefulness that there was one couple like them in every white suburban high school in America. And having something she had always longed for - a sense of place, of security, of status - she found that it carried uneasiness with it like a darker sister.
It was not the way she had conceived it. There were dark things lumbering around their warm circle of light. The idea that she had let him fuck her (do you have to say it that way yes this time I do) simply because he was Popular, for instance.
The fact that they fit together walking, or that she could look at their reflection in a store window and think. There goes a handsome couple. She was quite sure We walked onto the stand. Paul hit the customary drum-riff to signal that the band was back and ready to rock. Norm gave me a nod as he adjusted a guitar strap that didn't need adjusting.
I stepped to the center mike and bellowed, "This one is for Astrid, by request, and because wild thing, I think I LOVE you!" And although it was ordinarily Norm's job--his prerogative, as leader of the band--I counted the song off: One, two, you-know-what-to-do.
On the floor, Astrid's friends were pummeling her and shrieking. Her cheeks were bright red. She blew me a kiss. So the boys in Chrome Roses had girlfriends. Or maybe they were groupies. Or maybe they were both. When you're in a band, it's not always easy to tell where the line is. Norm had Hattie. Paul had Suzanne Fournier. Kenny had Carol Plummer. And I had Astrid.
Hattie, Suzanne, and Carol sometimes crammed into the microbus with us when we went to our gigs. Astrid wasn't allowed to do that, but when Suzanne was able to borrow her parents' car, Astrid was permitted to ride with the girls. Sometimes they got out on the floor and danced with each other; mostly they just stood in their own tight little clique and watched. Astrid and I spent most of the breaks kissing, and I began to taste cigarettes on her breath.
I didn't mind. When she saw that (girls have ways of knowing), she started to smoke around me, and a couple of times she'd blow a little into my mouth while we were kissing. It gave me a hard-on I could have broken concrete with.
A week after her fifteenth birthday, Astrid was allowed to go with us in the microbus to the PAL hop in Lewiston. We kissed all the way home, and when I slipped my hand inside her coat to cup a breast that was now quite a bit more than a nubbin, she didn't push it away as she always had before.
"That feels good," she whispered in my ear. "I know it's wrong, but it feels good." "Maybe that's why," I said. Sometimes boys aren't dopes.
It was another month before she allowed my hand in her bra, and two before I was allowed to explore all the way up her skirt, but when I eventually got there, she admitted that also felt good. But beyond that she would not go.
"I know I'd get pregnant the first time," she whispered in my ear one night when we were parking and things had gotten especially hot. "I can get something at the drugstore. I could go to Lewiston, where they don't know me."
"Carol says sometimes those things break. That's what happened one time when she was with Kenny, and she was scared for a month. She said she thought her period would never come. But there are other things we can do. She told me."
I got my license when I was sixteen, the only one of my siblings to succeed the first time I took the road test. I owed that partly to Driver's Ed and mostly to Cicero Irving. Norm lived with his mother, a goodhearted bottle blonde with a house in Gates Falls, but he spent most weekends with his dad, who lived in a scuzzy trailer park across the Harlow line in Motton.
If we had a gig on Saturday night, the band--along with our girlfriends--often got together at Cicero's trailer on Saturday afternoon for pizza. Joints were rolled and smoked, and after saying no for almost a year, I gave in and tried it.
I found it hard to hold the smoke in at first, but--as many of my readers will know for themselves--it gets easier. I never smoked much dope in those days; just enough to get loose for the show. I played better when I had a little residual buzz on, and we always laughed a lot in that old trailer.
When I told Cicero I was going for my license the following week, he asked me if my appointment was in Castle Rock or up-the-city, meaning Lewiston-Auburn. When I said it was L-A, he nodded sagely. "That means you'll get Joe Cafferty.
He's been doing that job for twenty years. I used to drink with him at the Mellow Tiger in Castle Rock, when I was a constable there. This was before the Rock got big enough to have a regular PD, you know."
It was hard to imagine Cicero Irving--grizzled, red-eyed, rail-thin, rarely dressed in anything but old khakis and strappy tee-shirts--being in the law enforcement biz, but people change; sometimes they go up the ladder and sometimes they go down.
Those descending are frequently aided by various substances, such as the one he was so adept at rolling and sharing with his son's teenage compadres."Ole Joey hardly ever gives anyone their license first crack out of the basket," Cicero said. "As a rule, he don't believe in it."
This I knew; Claire, Andy, and Con had all fallen afoul of Joe Cafferty. Terry drew someone else (perhaps Officer Cafferty was sick that day), and although he was an excellent driver from the first time he got behind the wheel, Terry was a bundle of nerves that day and managed to back into a fire hydrant when he tried to parallel-park.
"Three things if you want to pass," Cicero said, handing the joint he had just rolled to Paul Bouchard. "Number one, stay off this shit until after your road test." I didn't like that idea one bit. I had shot up three inches since joining the band, but when it came to hair, I was a slowpoke. It had taken me a year to get it almost down to my shoulders.
"Okay." That was actually something of a relief. I enjoyed the bud, but with every toke I remembered the promise I'd made to my mother and was now breaking although I consoled myself with the fact that I still wasn't smoking cigarettes or drinking, which meant I was batting
"Second, call him sir. Thank you sir when you get in the car and thank you sir when you get out. He likes that. Got it?" "Third and most important, cut your fucking hair. Joe Cafferty hates hippies."
There had also been a lot of hair arguments with my parents, who told me I looked like a bum. Andy's verdict was even blunter: "If you want to look like a girl, Jamie, why don't you put on a dress?" Gosh, there's nothing like reasoned Christian discourse, is there?
"Oh, man, if I cut my hair I'll look like a nerd!" "You look like a nerd already," Kenny said, and everyone laughed. Even Astrid laughed (then put a hand on my thigh to take the sting out of it).
"Yeah," Cicero Irving said, "you'll look like a nerd with a driver's license. Paulie, are you going to fire up that joint or just sit there and admire it?" I laid off the bud. I called Officer Cafferty sir. I got a Mr. Businessman haircut, which broke my heart and lifted my mother's.
When I parallel-parked, I tapped the bumper of the car behind me, but Officer Cafferty gave me my license, anyway. "I'm trusting you, son," he said. "Thank you, sir," I said. "I won't let you down."
When I turned seventeen, there was a birthday party for me at our house, which now stood on a paved road--the march of progress. Astrid was invited, of course, and she gave me a sweater she had knitted herself. I pulled it on at once, although it was August and the day was hot.
Mom gave me a hardbound set of Kenneth Roberts historical novels (which I actually read). Andy gave me a leatherbound Bible (which I also read, mostly to spite him) with my name stamped in gold on the front.
The inscription on the flyleaf was from Revelation 3: "Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him." The implication--that I had Fallen Away--was not exactly unwarranted.
From Claire--now twenty-five and teaching school in New Hampshire--I got a spiffy sportcoat. Con, always something of a cheapie, gave me six sets of guitar strings. Oh well, at least they were Dollar Slicks. Mom brought in the birthday cake, and everyone sang the traditional song. If Norm had been there, he probably would have blown the candles out with his rock-and-roll voice, but he wasn't, so I blew them out myself.
As Mom was passing the plates around, I realized I hadn't gotten anything from Dad or Terry--not so much as a Flower Power tie. After the cake and ice cream (van-choc-straw, of course), I saw Terry flash Dad a glance. Dad looked at Mom and she gave him a nervous little smile. It is only in retrospect that I realized how often I saw that nervous smile on my mother's face as her children grew up and went into the world.
"Come on out to the barn, Jamie," my dad said, standing up. "Terence and I have got a little something for you." The "little something" turned out to be a 1966 Ford Galaxie. It was washed, waxed, and as white as moonlight on snow. "Oh my God," I said in a faint voice, and everyone laughed."The body was good, but the engine needed some work," Terry said. "Me n Dad reground the valves, replaced the plugs, stuck in a new battery the works."
"New tires," Dad said, pointing to them. "Just blackwalls, but those are not recaps. Do you like it, Son?" I hugged him. I hugged them both.
"Just promise me and your mother that you'll never get behind the wheel if you've taken a drink. Don't make us have to look at each other someday and say we gave you something you used to hurt yourself or someone else."
"I promise," I said. Astrid--with whom I would share the last inch or so of a joint when I took her home in my new car--squeezed my arm. "And I'll make him keep it." After driving down to Harry's Pond twice (I had to make two trips so I could give everyone a ride), history repeated itself. I felt a tug on my hand. It was Claire.
She led me into the mudroom just as she had on the day Reverend Jacobs used his Electrical Nerve Stimulator to give Connie back his voice.
"Mom wants another promise from you," she said, "but she was too embarrassed to ask. So I said I'd do it for her." I waited.
"Astrid is a nice girl," Claire said. "She smokes, I can smell it on her breath, but that doesn't make her bad. And she's a girl with good taste. Going with you for three years proves that." I waited. "She's a smart girl, too. She's got college ahead of her. So here's the promise, Jamie: don't you get her pregnant in the backseat of that car. Can you promise that?"
I almost smiled. If I had, it would have been fifty percent amused and fifty percent pained. For the last two years, Astrid and I had had a code word: recess. It meant mutual masturbation.
I had mentioned condoms to her on several occasions after the first time, had even gone so far as to purchase a three-pack of Trojans (one kept in my wallet, the other two secreted behind the baseboard in my bedroom), but she was positive that the first one we tried would either break or leak.
"You're mad at me, aren't you?" Claire asked. "No," I said. "Never mad at you, Claire-Bear." And I never was. That anger was waiting for the monster she married, and it never abated. I hugged her and promised I would not get Astrid pregnant. It was a promise I kept, although we got close before that day in the cabin near Skytop.
In those years I sometimes dreamed of Charles Jacobs--I'd see him poking his fingers into my pretend mountain to make caves, or preaching the Terrible Sermon with blue fire circling his head like an electric diadem--but he pretty much slipped from my conscious mind until one day in June of 1974.
I was eighteen. So was Astrid. School was out. Chrome Roses had gigs lined up all summer (including a couple in bars, where my parents had given me reluctant written permission to perform), and during the days I'd be working at the Marstellars' farmstand, as I had the year before.
Morton Fuel Oil was doing well, and my parents could afford tuition at the University of Maine, but I was expected to do my share. I had a week before reporting for farmstead duty, though, so Astrid and I had a lot of time together.
Sometimes we went to my house; sometimes we were at hers. On a lot of afternoons we cruised the back roads in my Galaxie. We'd find a place to park and then recess. That afternoon we were in a disused gravel pit on Route 9, swapping a joint of not-very-good local grass back and forth. It was sultry, and stormclouds were forming in the west. Thunder rumbled, and there must have been lightning.
I didn't see it, but static crackled from the dashboard radio speaker, momentarily blotting out "Smokin' in the Boys' Room," a song the Roses played at every show that year. That was when Reverend Jacobs returned to my mind like a long absent guest, and I started the car. "Snuff that jay," I said. "Let's go for a ride." "Where?" "A place someone told me about a long time ago. If it's still there."
Astrid put the remains of the joint in a Sucrets box and tucked it under the seat. I drove a mile or two down Route 9, then turned west on Goat Mountain Road. Here the trees bulked close on either side, and the last of that day's hazy sunshine disappeared as the stormclouds rolled in.
"If you're thinking about the resort, they won't let us in," Astrid said. "My folks gave up their membership. They said they had to economize if I'm going to college in Boston." She wrinkled her nose.
People were throwing nervous glances at the sky as they gathered up their blankets and coolers and hurried to their cars. The thunder was louder now, loaded wagons rolling across the sky, and I saw a bolt of lightning hit somewhere on the other side of Skytop.
It wasn't gone, and it was still gravel. I turned into it a little too fast, and the Galaxie's rear end wagged first one way, then the other.
"I hope you know what you're doing," Astrid said. She didn't sound frightened to be driving straight toward a summer thunderstorm; she sounded interested and a little excited. "I hope so, too."
The grade steepened. The Galaxie's rear end flirted on the loose gravel from time to time, but mostly it held steady. Two and a half miles beyond the turnoff, the trees pulled back and there was Skytop. Astrid gasped and sat up straight in her seat. I hit the brake and brought my car to a crunching stop.
On our right was an old cabin with a mossy, sagging roof and crashed-out windows. Graffiti, most of it too faded to be legible, danced in tangles across the gray, paintless sides. Ahead and above us was a great bulging forehead of granite.
At the summit, just as Jacobs had told me half my life ago, was an iron pole jutting toward the clouds, which were now black and seemingly low enough to touch. To our left, where Astrid was looking, hills and fields and gray-green miles of woods stretched toward the ocean.
In that direction the sun was still shining, making the world glow. "Oh my God, was this here all the time? And you never took me?" "I never took myself," I said. "My old minister told me--"
That was as far as I got. A brilliant bolt of lightning came down from the sky. Astrid screamed and put her hands over her head. For a moment--strange, terrible, wonderful--it seemed to me that the air had been replaced by electric oil. I felt the hair all over my body, even the fine ones in my nose and ears, go stiff.
Then came the click, as if an invisible giant had snapped his fingers. A second bolt flashed down and hit the iron rod, turning it the same bright blue I had seen dancing around Charles Jacobs's head in my dreams. I had to shut my eyes to keep from going blind.
When I opened them again, the pole was glowing cherry red. Like a horseshoe in a forge, he'd said, and that was just what it was like. Follow-thunder bellowed. "Do you want to get out of here?" I was shouting. I had to, in order to hear myself over the ringing in my ears. "No!" she shouted back. "In there!" And pointed at the slumping remains of the cabin.
I thought of telling her we'd be safer in the car--some vaguely remembered adage about how rubber tires could ground you and protect you from lightning--but there had been thousands of storms on Skytop, and the old cabin was still standing.
As we ran toward it, hand in hand, I realized there was a good reason for that. The iron rod drew the lightning. At least it had so far. It began to hail as we reached the open door, pebble-size chunks of ice that struck the granite with a rattling sound.
"Ouch, ouch, ouch!" Astrid yelled . . . but she was laughing at the same time. She darted in. I followed just as the lightning flashed again, artillery on some apocalyptic battlefield. This time it was preceded by a snap instead of a click.
I'd missed the storm's second swipe at the iron rod, but I clearly saw what followed. Balls of St. Elmo's fire bounced and rolled down the scree-littered slope. There were half a dozen. One by one they popped out of existence.
Astrid hugged me, but that wasn't enough. She locked her hands around my neck and climbed me, her thighs locked around my hips. "This is fantastic!" she screamed.
The hail turned to rain, and it came in a deluge. Skytop was blotted out, but we never lost sight of the iron rod, because it was struck repeatedly. It would glow blue or purple, then red, then fade, only to be struck again.
Rain like that rarely lasts long. As it lessened, we saw that the granite slope below the iron rod had turned into a river. The thunder continued to rumble, but it was losing its fury and subsiding into sulks. We heard running water everywhere, as if the earth were whispering.
The sun was still shining to the east, over Brunswick and Freeport and Jerusalem's Lot, where we saw not one or two rainbows but half a dozen, interlocking like Olympic rings.Astrid turned me toward her. "I have to tell you something," she said. Her voice was low.
"What?" I was suddenly sure that she would destroy this transcendent moment by telling me we had to break up. "Last month my mother took me to the doctor.
She said she didn't want to know how serious we were about each other, that it wasn't her business, but she needed to know I was taking care of myself. That was how she put it. 'All you have to say is that you want it because your periods are painful and irregular,' she said. 'When he sees that I brought you myself, that will do.'"
I was a little slow, I guess, so she punched me in the chest."Birth control pills, dummy. Ovral. It's safe now, because I had a period since I started taking them. I've been waiting for the right time, and if this isn't it, there won't ever be one."
Those luminous eyes on mine. Then she dropped them, and began biting her lip. "Just don't . . . don't get carried away, all right? Think of me and be gentle. Because I'm scared. Carol said her first time hurt like hell."
The Farallon Trench was a subduction related tectonic formation located off the coast of the western California continental margin during the late to mid Cenozoic era, around 50 miles southeast of modern-day Monterey Bay.
The time duration of subduction began from around 165 Ma when the Farallon Plate replaced the Mezcalera promontory, until the San Andreas Fault straightening around 35 Ma.
As data accumulated over time, a common view developed that one large oceanic plate, the Farallon Plate, acted as a conveyor belt, conveying accreted terranes onto the North American west coast.
As the continent overran the subducting Farallon Plate, the denser plate became subducted into the mantle below the continent.
When the plates converged, the dense oceanic plate sank into the mantle to form a slab below the lighter continent. Rapid subduction under the southwestern North America continent began 40 to 60 million years ago (Ma),[4] during the mid Paleocene to mid Eocene epochs.
This convergent subduction margin created a distinctive geomorphologic feature called an oceanic trench, which occurs at a convergent plate boundaries as a heavy metal rich, lithospheric plate moves below a light silica rich continental plate.
The trench marks the position at which the flexed subducting slab begins to descend beneath and deform the continental plate margin.
By 43 Ma, during the Eocene, worldwide plate motions changed and the Pacific Plate began to move away from North America and subduction of the Farallon Plate slowed dramatically.
By around 36 Ma, the easternmost part of the East Pacific Rise, located between the Pioneer and Murray fracture zones at that time, approached the trench and the young, hot, buoyant lithosphere appears to have clogged part of the subduction zone, resulting in widespread dramatic uplift on land.
The eventual complete subduction of this plate, consequential contact of the Pacific Plate with the California continental margin, and creation of the Mendocino Triple Junction (MTJ), took place around 30 to 20 Ma.
The partial complete subduction and division of the Farallon Plate by the Pacific Plate, created the Juan de Fuca Plate to the north and the Cocos Plate to the south.
The final stages of the evolution of California's continental margin was the growth of the San Andreas transform fault system, which formed as the Pacific Plate came into contact with the continental margin and the MTJ was formed.
As subduction of the Pacific Plate continued along this margin, and the contact zone grew, the San Andreas proportionally grew as well.
Under clouds that still raced east to west, blacker shapes against a black sky, and a moon that was now settling toward the horizon, the pony-trap sped toward the churchyard.
It was now Mrs. Ramage who drove, cracking the whip over the bewildered Mary, who would have told them, if horses could talk, that this was all wrong - she was supposed to be dozing in her warm stall come this time of night.
The spades and the pick chattered coldly one against the other, and Mrs. Ramage thought they would have given anyone who had seen them a proper fright - they must look like a pair of Mr. Dickens's resurrection men. . . or perhaps one resurrection man sitting in a pony-trap driven by a ghost.
For she was all in white - had not even paused long enough to gather up her robe. Her nightgown fluttered around her stout, vein-puffed ankles, and the tails of her cap streamed wildly out behind her.
Here was the church. She turned Mary up the lane which ran beside it, shivering at the ghostly sound of the wind playing along the eaves.
She had a moment to wonder why such a holy place as a church should seem so frightening after dark, and then realized it was not the church. . . it was the errand.
Her first thought upon coming out of her faint was that My Lord must help them - hadn't he been there in all things, through thick and thin, never wavering? A moment later she had realized how mad the idea was. This was not a matter of My Lord's courage, but of his very sanity.
She hadn't needed Mr. Geoffrey to tell her so; the memory of Miss Evelyn-Hyde had done that.She realized that neither Mr. Geoffrey nor My Lord had been in Little Dunthorpe when it had happened.
This had been almost half a year ago, in the spring. Misery had entered the rosy summer of her pregnancy, morning sickness behind her, the final rising of her belly and its attendant discomfort still ahead, and she had cheerfully sent the two men off for a week of grouse-shooting and card-playing and footballing and heaven alone knew what other masculine foolishness at Oak Hall in Doncaster.
My Lord had been a bit doubtful, but Misery assured him she would be fine, and nearly pushed him out the door. That Misery would be fine Mrs. Ramage had no doubt. But whenever My Lord and Mr. Geoffrey left for Doncaster, she wondered if one of them - or perhaps both - might not return on the back of a cart, toes up.
Oak Hall was the inheritance of Albert Fossington, a schoolmate of Geoffrey's and Ian's. Mrs. Ramage quite rightly believed that Bertie Fossington was mad. Some three years ago he had eaten his favorite polo pony after it had broken two legs and needed to be destroyed.
It was a gesture of affection, he said. "Learned it from the fuzzy-wuzzies in Capetown," he said. "Griquas. Wonderful chaps. Put sticks and things in their smoochers, what?
Some of "em look like they could carry all twelve volumes of the Royal Navigation Charts on their lower lips, ha-ha! Taught me that each make must eat the thing he loves. Rather poetic in a grisly sort of way, what?" In spite of I such bizarre behavior, Mr. Geoffrey and My Lord retained a great affection for Bertie. (I wonder if that means they'll have to eat him when he's dead? Mrs.
Ramage had once wondered after a visit from Bertie during which he had tried to play croquet with one of the housecats, quite shattering its poor little head), and they had spent nearly ten days at Oak Hall this past spring.
Not more than a day or two after they left, Miss Charlotte Evelyn-Hyde of Storping-on-Firkill had been found dead on the back lawn of her home, Cove o'Birches. There had been a freshly picked bunch of flowers near one outstretched hand.
The village doctor was a man named Billford - a capable man by all accounts. Nevertheless, he had called old Dr. Shinebone in to consult. Billford had diagnosed the fatal malady as a heart attack, although the girl was very young - only eighteen - and had seemed in the pink of health. Billford was puzzled.
Something seemed not at all right. Old Shinny had been clearly puzzled as well, but in the end he had concurred with the diagnosis.
So did most of the village, for that matter - the girl's heart had not been properly made, that was all, such things were rare but everyone could recall such a sad case at one time or another.
It was probably this universal concurrence that had saved Billford's practice - if not his head - following the ghastly denouement. Although everyone had agreed that the girl's death was puzzling, it had crossed no one's mind that she might not be dead at all.
Four days following the interment, an elderly woman named Mrs. Soames - Mrs. Rainage knew her slightly - had observed something white lying on the ground of the Congregational church's cemetery as she entered it to put flowers on the grave of her husband, who had died the previous winter.
It was much too big to be a flower petal, and she thought it might be a dead bird of some sort. As she approached she became more and more sure that the white object was not just lying on the ground, but protruding from it.
She came two or three hesitant steps closer yet, and observed a hand reaching from the earth of a fresh grave, the fingers frozen in a hideous gesture of supplication. Blood-streaked bones protruded from the ends of all the digits save the thumb.
Mrs. Soames ran shrieking from the cemetery, ran all the way into Storping's high street - a run of nearly a mile and a quarter - and reported her news to the barber, who was also the local constable.
Then she had collapsed in a dead faint. She took to her bed later that afternoon and did not arise from it for nearly a month. Nor did anyone in the village blame her in the least.
The body of the unfortunate Miss Evelyn-Hyde had been exhumed, of course, and as Geoffrey Alliburton drew Mary to a halt in front of the gate leading into Little Dunthorpe's C of E churchyard, Mrs. Ramage found herself wishing fervently that she had not listened to the tales of the exhumation. They had been dreadful.
Dr. Billford, shaken to within an inch of sanity himself, diagnosed catalepsy. The poor woman had apparently fallen into some sort of deathlike trance, much like the sort those Indian fakirs could voluntarily induce in themselves before allowing themselves to be buried alive or to have needles passed through their flesh.
She had remained in this trance for perhaps forty-eight hours, perhaps sixty. Long enough, at any rate, to have awakened not to find herself on her back lawn where she had been picking flowers, but buried alive in her own coffin.
She had fought grimly for her life, that girl, and Mrs. Ramage found now, following Geoffrey through the gates and into a thin mist that turned the leaning grave markers into islands, that what should have redeemed with nobility only made it seem all the more horrid.
The girl had been engaged to be married. In her left hand - not the one frozen above the soil like the hand of a drowned woman - had been her diamond engagement ring.
With it she had slit the satin lining of her coffin and over God knew how many hours she had used it to claw away at the coffin's wooden lid. In the end, air running out, she had apparently used the ring with her left hand to cut and excavate and her right hand to dig.
It had not been quite enough. Her complexion had been a deep purple from which her blood-rimmed eyes stared in a bulging expression of terminal horror.
The clock in the church tower began to chime the hour of twelve - the hour when, her mother had told her, the door between life and death sways open a bit and the dead may pass both ways and it was all Mrs. Ramage could do to keep herself from shrieking and fleeing in a panic which would not abate but grow stronger with each step; if she began running, she knew, she would simply run until she fell down insensible.
Stupid, fearful woman! she berated herself, and then amended that to: Stupid, fearful, selfish woman! It's My Lord ye want to be thinkin" of now, and not yer own fears My Lord. and if there is even one chance that My Lady - Ah, but no - it was madness to even think of such a thing. It had been too long, too long, too long.
Geoffrey had led her to Misery's tombstone, and the two of them stood looking down at it, as if mesmerized. LADY CALTHORPE, the stone read. Other than the dates of her birth and death, the only inscription was: LOVED BY MANY. She looked at Geoffrey and said, like one awakening from a deep daze: "Ye've not brought the tools. "
"No - not yet," he responded, and threw himself full-length on the ground and placed his ear against the earth, which had already begun to show the first tender shoots of new grass between the rather carelessly replaced sods.
For a moment the only expression she saw there by the lamp she carried was the one Geoffrey had worn since she had first opened her door to him - a look of agonized dread. Then a new expression began to surface. This new expression was one of utter horror mingled with an almost demented hope.
He looked up at Mrs. Ramage, eyes staring, mouth working. "I believe she lives," he whispered strengthlessly. "Oh, Mrs. Ramage - " Suddenly he turned over onto his belly and screamed at the ground - under other circumstances it would have been comic.
"Misery! MISERY! WE'RE HERE! WE KNOW! HOLD ON! HOLD ON, MY DARLING!" He was on his feet a moment later, sprinting back toward the pony-trap, where the digging tools were, his slippered feet sending the placid groumdmist into excited little roils.
Mrs. Ramage's knees unlocked and she buckled forward, near to swooning again. Of its own accord, seemingly, her head slipped to one side so her right ear was pressed against the ground - she had seen children in similar postures by the railway line, listening for trains.
And she heard it - low, painful scraping sounds in the earth - not the sounds of a burrowing animal, these; these were the sounds of fingers scraping helplessly on wood.
She drew in breath in one great convulsive gulp, re-starting her own heart, it seemed. She shrieked: "WERE COMING, MY LADY! PRAISE GOD AND PLEAD SWEET JESUS WE BE IN TIME - WE'RE COMING!"
She began to pull half healed turves out of the ground with her trembling fingers, and although Geoffrey returned in almost no time, she had by then already clawed a hole some eight inches deep.
Outside this, separate of the atmosphere and apart from the deep, maddening itch of his healing legs, its own serene thing, the work continued. The stack of pages to the right of the Royal grew steadily taller.
Before this strange experience, he had considered four pages a day to be his optimum output (on Fast Cars it had usually been three - and only two, on many days - before the final finishing sprint).
But during this electric three-week period, which came to an end with the rainstorm of April 15th, Paul averaged twelve pages a day - seven in the morning, five more in an evening session. If anyone in his previous life (for so he had come to think of it, without even realizing it) had suggested he could work at such a pace, Paul would have laughed.
When the rain began to fall, he had two hundred and sixty-seven pages of Misery's Return - first-draft stuff, sure, but he had scanned through it and thought it amazingly clean for a first.
Part of the reason was that he was living an amazingly straight life. No long, muddled nights spent bar-hopping, followed by long, muddled days spent drinking coffee and orange juice and gobbling vitamin-B tablets (days when if his glance so much as happened upon his typewriter, he would turn away, shuddering).
No more waking up next to a big blonde or redhead he had picked up somewhere the night before - a lass who usually looked like a queen at midnight and a goblin at ten the next morning. No more cigarettes.
He had once asked for them in a timid and tentative voice, and she had given him a look of such utter darkness that he had told her at once to forget it. He was Mr Clean.
No bad habits (except for his codeine jones, of course, still haven't done anything about that, have we, Paul?), no distractions. Here I am, he thought once, the world's only monastic druggie.
Up at seven. Down two Novril with juice. At eight o'clock breakfast came, served at monsieur's bedside. A single egg, poached or scrambled, three days a week. High-fiber cereal the other four days. Then into the wheelchair. Over to the window. Find the hole in the paper.
Fall into the nineteenth century, when men were men and women wore bustles. Lunch. Afternoon nap. Up again, sometimes to edit, sometimes just to read.
She had everything Somerset Maugham had ever written (once Paul found himself wondering dourly if she had John Fowles's first novel on her shelves and decided it might be better not to ask), and Paul began to work his way through the twenty-odd volumes that comprised Maugham's oeuvre, fascinated by the man's canny grasp of story values.
Over the years Paul had grown more and more resigned to the fact that he could not read stories as he had when he was a kid; by becoming a writer of them himself, he had condemned himself to a life of dissection.
But Maugham first seduced him and then made him a child again, and that was wonderful. At five o'clock she would serve him a light supper, and at seven she would roll in the black-and-white television and they would watch M*A*S*H* and WKRP in Cincinnati.
When these were over, Paul would write. When he was done, he would roll the wheelchair slowly (he could have gone much faster, but it was just as well that Annie should not know that) over to the bed. She would hear come in, and help him back into bed.
More medication. Boom. Out like a light. And the next day would be just the same. And the next. And the next. Being such a straight arrow was part of the reason for this amazing fecundity, but Annie herself was a bigger one. Minor matters such as what the fucking book was supposed to be about would have to wait.
After all, it was her single hesitant suggestion about the bee-sting which had shaped the book and given it its urgency when Paul had firmly believed he could never feel urgent about Misery again.
He'd been sure of one thing from the start: there really was no Misery's Retum. His attention had been focused only on finding a way to get the bitch out of her grave without cheating before Annie decided to inspire him by giving him an enema with a handful of Ginsu knives.
During the two days following Annie's trip to town to pay her tax-bill, Paul tried to forget his failure to take advantage of what could have been a golden opportunity to escape and concentrated on getting Misery back to Mrs Ramage's cottage instead.
Taking her to Geoffrey's home was no good. The servants - most notably Geoffrey's gossipy butler, Tyler - would see and talk. Also, he needed to establish the total amnesia which had been caused by the shock of being buried alive. Amnesia? Shit, the chick could barely talk.
Sort of a relief, given Misery's usual burblings. So - what next? The bitch was out of her grave, now where was the fucking story?
Should Geoffrey and Mrs Ramage tell Ian that Misery was still alive? Paul didn't think so but he wasn't sure - not being sure of things, he knew, was a charmless corner of purgatory reserved for writers who were driving fast with no idea at all where they were going.
Not Ian, he thought, looking out at the barn. Not Ian, not yet. The doctor first. That old asshole with all the n's in his name, Shinebone.
The thought of the doctor brought Annie's comment about bee-stings to mind, and not for the first time. It kept recurring at odd moments. One person in every dozen. But it just wouldn't play. Two unrelated women in neighboring townships, both allergic to stings in the same rare way?
Three days following the Great Annie Wilkes Tax Bailout, Paul had been drowsing his way into his afternoon nap when the guys in the sweatshop weighed in, and weighed in heavy. This time it wasn't a flare; this time it was an H-bomb explosion.
He sat bolt upright in bed, ignoring the flare of pain which shot up his legs. "Annie!" he bawled. "Annie, come in here!" He heard her thump down the stairs two at a time and then run down the hallway. Her eyes were wide and scared when she came in.
"Paul! What's wrong? Are you cramping? "No "he said, but of course he was; his mind was cramping. "No. Annie, I'm sorry if I scared you, but you gotta help me into the chair.
Mighty fuck! I got it!" The dreaded effword was out before he could help it, but this time it didn't seem to matter - she was looking at him respectfully, and with not a little awe. Here was the secular version of the Pentecostal fire, burning before her very eyes.
"Of course, Paul. " She got him into the chair as quickly as she could. She began to roll him toward the window and Paul shook his head impatiently. "This won't take long," he said, "but it's very important. "
"Is it about the book?" "It is the book. Be quiet. Don't talk to me. " Ignoring the typewriter - he never used the typewriter to make notes - he seized one of the ballpoints and quickly covered a single sheet of paper with a scrawl that probably no one but himself could have read.
They WERE related. It was bees and it affected them both the same way because they WERE related. Misery's an orph. And guess what? The Evelyn-Hyde babe was MISERY'S SISTER! Or maybe half-sister. That would probably work better. Who gets the first hint? Shinny? No. Shinny's a ninny. Mrs R. She can go to see Charl. E-H's mommy and
And now he was struck by an idea of such intense loveliness - in terms of the plot at least - that he looked up, mouth open, eyes wide. "Paul?" Annie asked anxiously. "She knew," Paul whispered. "Of course she did. At least strongly suspected. But - " He bent to his notes again.
Since then the work had driven on famously. Annie was right; the story was turning out to be a good deal more gruesome than the other Misery books - the first chapter had not been a fluke but a harbinger.
But it was also more richly plotted than any Misery novel since the first, and the characters were more lively. The latter three Misery novels had been little more than straightforward adventure tales with a fair amount of piquantly described sex thrown in to please the ladies.
This book, he began to understand, was a gothic novel, and thus was more dependent on plot than on situation. The challenges were constant. It was not just a question of Can You? to begin the book - for the first time in years, it was Can You? almost every day and he was finding he could.
From the eighth of April until the fourteenth they enjoyed an unbroken run of fine weather. The sun beamed down from a cloudless sky and temperatures sometimes rose into the mid-sixties. Brown patches began to a appear in the field behind Annie's neat red barn.
Paul hid behind his work and tried not to think about his car, the discovery of which was already overdue. His work did not suffer, but his mood did; he felt more and more that he was living in a cloud chamber, breathing an atmosphere thick with uncoalesced electricity.
Whenever the Camaro stole into his mind, he immediately called the Brain Police and had the thought led away in handcuffs and leg-irons. Trouble was, the nasty thing had a way of escaping and coming back time after time, in one form or another.
One night he dreamed that Mr Rancho Grande returned to Annie's place. He got out of his well-kept Chevrolet Bel Air, holding part of the Camaro's bumper in one hand and its steering wheel in the other. Do these belong to you? he asked Annie in this dream.
Paul had awakened in a less-than-cheery frame of mind. Annie, on the other hand, had never been in better spirits than she was during that sunny early-spring week.
She cleaned; she cooked ambitious meals (although everything she cooked came out tasting strangely industrial, as if years of eating in hospital cafeterias had somehow corrupted any culinary talent she might once have had); each afternoon she bundled Paul up in a huge blue blanket, jammed a green hunting cap on his head, and rolled him out onto the back porch.
On those occasions he would take Maugham along, but rarely read him - being outside again was too great an experience to allow much concentration on other things.
Mostly he just sat, smelling sweet cool air instead of the bedroom's stale indoor smell, sly with sickroom undertones, listened to the drip of the icicles, and watched the cloud-shadows roll slowly and steadily across the melting field. That was somehow best of all.
Annie sang in her on-pitch but queerly tuneless voice. She giggled like a child at the jokes on M*A*S*H* and WKRP, laughing especially hard at the jokes which were mildly off-color (which, in the case of WKRP, was most of them. ). She filled in n s tirelessly as Paul finished Chapters 9 and 10.
The morning of the fifteenth dawned windy and dull with clouds, and Annie changed. Perhaps, Paul thought, it was the falling barometer. It was as good an explanation as any.
She did not show up with his medication until nine o'clock, and by then he needed it quite badly - so badly that he had been thinking of going to his stash. There was no breakfast. just the pills. When she came in she was still in her pink quilted housecoat.
He noted with deepening misgivings that there were red marks like weals on her cheeks and arms. He also saw gooey splatters of food on the housecoat, and she had only managed to get on one of her slippers. Thud-slush, went Annie's feet as she approached him.
Thud-slush, thud-slush, thud-slush. Her hair hung around her face. Her eyes were dull. i "Here. " She threw the pills at him. Her hands were also covered with mixed streaks of goo. Red stuff, brown stuff, sticky white stuff. Paul had no idea what it was.
He wasn't sure he wanted to know. The pills hit his chest and bounced into his lap. She turned to go. Thud-slush, thud-slush, thud-slush.
"Annie?" She stopped, not turning around. She looked bigger that way, with her shoulders rounding the pink housecoat, her hair like some battered helmet. She looked like a Piltdown woman staring out of her cave.
"Annie, are you all right?" "No," she said indifferently, and turned around. She looked at him with that same dullard's expression as she pinched her lower lip between the thumb and first finger of her right hand. She pulled it out and then twisted it, pinching inward at the same time.
Blood first welled between lip and then gushed down her chin. She turned and left without speaking a word, before his stunned mind could persuade itself that he had really seen her do that. She closed the door. . . and locked it. He heard her thud-slushing her way down the hall to the parlor.
He heard the creak of her favorite chair as she sat down. Nothing else. No TV. No singing. No click-clink of silver on crockery. No, she was just sitting there. Just sitting there being not all right.
Then there was a sound. It was not repeated, but it was utterly distinctive. It was a slap. A damned hard one. And since he was in here on one side of a locked door and she was out there on the other side of it, you didn't have to be Sherlock Holmes to figure out that she'd slapped herself.
Good and hard, from the sound. He saw her pulling her lip out, digging her short nails into its sensitive pink meat. He suddenly remembered a note on mental illness he had taken for the first Misery book, where much of the action had been set in London's Bedlam Hospital (Misery had been railroaded there by the madly jealous villainess).
When a manic-depressive personality begins to slide deeply into a depressive period, he had written, one symptom he or she may exhibit is acts of self-punishment: slapping, punching, pinching, burning one's self w/ cigarette butts, etc He was suddenly very scared.
Paul remembered an essay by Edmund Wilson where Wilson had said, in typically grudging Wilson manner, that Wordsworth's criterion for the writing of good poetry - strong emotion recalled in a time of tranquility - would do well enough for most dramatic fiction as well.
It was probably true. Paul had known writers who found it impossible to write after so much as a minor marital spat, and he himself usually found it impossible to write when upset. These were usually occasions when rectifying the source of the upset was beyond him.
But there were times when a kind of reverse effect obtained - these were times when he had gone to the work not just because the work ought to be done but because it was a way to escape whatever was upsetting him.
This is the story of a lover's triangle, I suppose you'd say--Arnie Cunningham, Leigh Cabot, and, of course, Christine. But I want you to understand that Christine was there first. She was Arnie's first love, and while I wouldn't presume to say for sure (not from whatever heights of wisdom I've attained in my twenty-two years, anyway), I think she was his only true love. So I call what happened a tragedy.
Arnie and I grew up on the same block together, went to Owen Andrews Grammar School and Darby Junior High together, then to Libertyville High together. I guess I was the main reason Arnie didn't just get gobbled up in high school.
I was a big guy there--yeah, I know that doesn't mean donkeyshit; five years after you've graduated you can't even cadge a free beer on having been captain of the football and baseball teams and an All-Conference swimmer--but because I was, Arnie at least never got killed. He took a lot of abuse, but he never got killed.
He was a loser, you know. Every high school has to have at least two; it's like a national law. One male, one female. Everyone's dumping ground. Having a bad day? Flunked a big test?
Had an argument with your folks and got grounded for the weekend? No problem. Just find one of those poor sad sacks that go scurrying around the halls like criminals before the home-room bell and walk it right to him. And some-limes they do get killed, in every important way except the physical;
sometimes they find something to hold onto and they survive. Arnie had me. And then he had Christine. Leigh came later. I just wanted you to understand that. Arnie was a natural out. He was out with the jocks because he was scrawny--five-ten and about a hundred and forty pounds soaking wet in all his clothes plus a pair of Desert Driver boots.
He was out with the high school intellectuals (a pretty "out" group themselves in a burg like Libertyville) because he had no specialty. Arnie was smart, but his brains didn't go naturally to any one thing unless it was automotive mechanics. He was great at that stuff.
When it came to cars, the kid was some kind of a goofy born natural. But his parents, who both taught at the University in Horlicks, could not see their son, who had scored in the top five percent on his Stanford-Binet, taking the shop courses. He was lucky they let him take Auto Shop I, II, and III.
He had to battle his butt off to get that. He was out with the druggies because he didn't do dope. He was out with the macho pegged-jeans-and-Lucky-Strikes group because he didn't do booze and if you hit him hard enough, he'd cry. Oh yes, and he was out with the girls. His glandular machinery had gone totally bananas. I mean, Arnie was pimple city.
He washed his face maybe five times a day, took maybe two dozen showers a week, and tried every cream and nostrum known to modern science. None of it did any good. Arnie's face looked like a loaded pizza, and he was going to have one of those pitted, poxy faces forever.
I liked him just the same. He had a quirky sense of humor and a mind that never stopped asking questions, playing games, and doing funky little calisthenics. It was Arnie who showed me how to make an ant farm when I was seven, and we spent just about one whole summer watching those little buggers, fascinated by their industry and their deadly seriousness.
It was Arnie's suggestion when we were ten that we sneak out one night and put a load of dried horseapples from the Route 17 Stables under the gross plastic horse on the lawn of the Libertyville Motel just over the line in Monroeville. Arnie knew about chess first. He knew about poker first.
He showed me how to maximize my Scrabble score. On rainy days, right up until the time I fell in love (well, sort of--she was a cheerleader with a fantastic body and I sure was in love with that, although when Arnie pointed out that her mind had all the depth and resonance of a Shaun Cassidy 45, I couldn't really tell him he was full of shit, because he wasn't), it was Arnie I thought of first, because Arnie knew how to maximize rainy days just like he knew how to maximize Scrabble scores.
Maybe that's one of the ways you recognize really lonely people they can always think of something neat to do on rainy days. You can always call them up. They're always home. Fucking always. For my part, I taught him how to swim. I worked out with him and got him to eat his green vegetables so he could build up that scrawny bod a little.
I got him a job on a road crew the year before our senior year at Libertyville High--and for that one we both battled our butts off with his parents, who saw themselves as great friends of the farm workers in California and the steel-workers in the Burg, but who were horrified at the idea of their gifted son (top five percent on his Stanford-Binet, remember) getting his wrists dirty and his neck red.
Then, near the end of that summer vacation, Arnie saw Christine for the first time and fell in love with her. I was with him that day--we were on our way home from work--and I would testify on the matter before the Throne of Almighty God if called upon to do so.
Brother, he fell and he fell hard. It could have been funny if it hadn't been so sad, and if it hadn't gotten scary as quick as it did. It could have been funny if it hadn't been so bad.
By 11:00 A.M., when Dennis Guilder finally left Libertyville Community Hospital (as per hospital regulations, he was not allowed on his crutches until he was actually out of the building; until then he was pushed along in a wheelchair by Elaine), the sky had begun to scum over with clouds and there was an eerie fairy ring around the sun.
Dennis crossed the parking lot carefully on his crutches, his mother and father bookending him nervously in spite of the fact that the lot had been scrupulously salted free of even the slightest trace of snow and ice. He paused by the family car, turning his face up slightly into the freshening breeze. Being outside was like a resurrection. He felt he could stand here for hours and not have enough of it.
By one o'clock that afternoon, the Cunningham family station wagon had reached the outskirts of Ligonier, ninety miles east of Libertyville. The sky had gone a smooth and pregnant slate-gray by this time, and the temperature had dropped six degrees.
It had been Arnie's idea that they not cancel the traditional Christmas Eve visit with Aunt Vicky and Uncle Steve, Regina's sister and her husband. The two families had created a casual, loosely rotating ritual over the years, with Vicky and Steve coming to their house some years, the Cunninghams going over to Ligonier on others.
This year's trip had been arranged in early December. It had been cancelled after what Regina stubbornly called "Arnie's trouble," but at the beginning of last week, Arnie had begun restlessly agitating for the trip.
At last, after a long telephone conversation with her sister on Wednesday, Regina gave in to Arnie's wish--mostly because Vicky had seemed calm and understanding and most of all not very curious about what had happened.
That was important to Regina--more important than she would perhaps ever be able to say. It seemed to her that in the eight days since Arnie had been arrested in New York, she had had to cope with a seemingly endless flood of rancid curiosity masquerading as sympathy.
Talking to Vicky on the telephone, she had finally broken down and cried. It was the first and only time since Arnie had been arrested in New York that she had allowed herself that bitter luxury.
Arnie had been in bed asleep. Michael, who was drinking much too much and passing it off as "the spirit of the season," had gone down to O'Malley's for a beer or two with Paul Strickland, another factory reject in the game of faculty politics. It would probably end up being six beers, or eight, or ten.
And if she went upstairs to his study later on, she would find him sitting bolt upright behind his desk, looking out into the dark, his eyes dry but bloodshot. If she tried to speak with him, his conversation would be horribly confused and centered too much in the past.
She supposed her husband might be having a very quiet mental breakdown. She would not allow herself the same luxury (for so, in her own hurt and angry state, she thought it), and every night her mind ticked and whirred with plans and schemes until three or four o'clock.
All these thoughts and schemes were aimed at one end: "Getting us over this." The only two ways she would allow her mind to approach what had happened were deliberately vague. She thought about "Arnie's trouble" and "Getting us over this."
But, talking to Vicky on the phone a few days after her son's arrest, Regina's iron control had wavered briefly. She cried on Vicky's shoulder long-distance, and Vicky had been calmly comforting, making Regina hate herself for all the cheap shots she had taken at Vicky over the years.
Vicky, whose only daughter had dropped out of junior college to get married and become a housewife, whose only son had been content with a vocational-technical school (none of that for her son! Regina had thought with a private exultation); Vicky whose husband sold, of all hilarious things, life insurance.
And Vicky (hilariouser and hilariouser) sold Tupperware. But it was Vicky she had been able to cry to, it had been Vicky to whom she had been able to express at least part of her tortured sense of disappointment and terror and hurt; yes, and the terrible embarrassment of it, of knowing that people were talking and that people who had for years wanted to see her take a fall were now satisfied.
It was Vicky, maybe it had always been Vicky, and Regina decided that if there was to be a Christmas at all for them this miserable year, it would be at Vicky and Steve's ordinary suburban ranchhouse in the amusingly middle-class suburb of Ligonier, where most people still owned American cars and called a trip to McDonald's "eating out."
Mike, of course, simply went along with her decision; she would have expected no more and brooked no less. For Regina Cunningham the three days following the news that Arnie was "in trouble" had been an exercise in pure cold control, a hard lunge for survival. Her survival, the family's survival, Arnie's survival-he might not believe that, but Regina found she hadn't the time to care.
Mike's pain had never entered her equations; the thought that they could comfort each other had never even crossed her mind as a speculation. She had calmly put the cover on her sewing machine after Mike came downstairs and gave her the news.
She did that, and then she had gone to the phone and had gotten to work. The tears she would later shed while talking to her sister had then been a thousand years away. She had brushed past Michael as if he were a piece of the furniture, and he had trailed uncertainly after her as he had done all of their married life.
She called Tom Sprague, their lawyer, who, hearing that their problem was criminal, hastily referred her to a colleague, Jim Warberg. She called Warberg and got an answering service that would not reveal Warberg's home number.
She sat by the phone for a moment, drumming her fingers lightly against her hps, and then called their family lawyer back. Sprague hadn't wanted to give her Warberg's home telephone number, but in the end he gave in. When Regina finally let him go, Sprague sounded dazed, almost shell-shocked. Regina in full spate often caused such a reaction.
She called Warberg, who said he absolutely couldn't take the case. Regina had lowered her bulldozer blade again. Warberg ended up not only taking the case but agreeing to go immediately to Albany, where Arnie was being held, to see what could be done.
Warberg, speaking in the weak, amazed voice of a man who has been filled full of Novocain and then run over by a tractor, protested that he knew a perfectly good man in Albany who could get the lay of the land. Regina was adamant. Warberg went by private plane and reported back four hours later.
Arnie, he said, was being held on an open charge. He would be extradited to Pennsylvania the following day. Those guys, Warberg said, with their suspected ties to organized crime and disorganized drug smuggling in the new South, were the big beans.
Pennsylvania and New York had coordinated the bust along with three Federal agencies: the Federal Drug Control Task Force, the IRS, and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms. The main target was not Arnie, who was small beans, but Will Darnell--Darnell, and whomever Darnell was doing business with. "Holding someone on an open charge is illegal," Regina had snapped immediately, drawing on a deep backlog of TV crime-show fare.
Warberg, not exactly overjoyed to be where he was when he had planned on spending a quiet evening at home reading a book, rejoined crisply, "I'd be down on my knees thanking God that's what they're doing.
They caught him with a trunkload of unstamped cigarettes, and if I push them on it, they'll be more than happy to charge him, Mrs. Cunningham. I advise you and your husband to get over here to Albany. Quickly."
On a very hot day in August of 1994, my wife told me she was going down to the Derry Rite Aid to pick up a refill on her sinus medicine prescription this is stuff you can buy over the counter these days, I believe.
I'd finished my writing for the day and offered to pick it up for her. She said thanks, but she wanted to get a piece of fish at the supermarket next door anyway; two birds with one stone and all of that. She blew a kiss at me off the palm of her hand and went out.
The next time I saw her, she was on TV. That's how you identify the dead here in Derry no walking down a subterranean corridor with green tiles on the walls and long fluorescent bars overhead, no naked body rolling out of a chilly drawer on casters; you just go into an office marked PRIVATE and look at a TV screen and say yep or nope.
The Rite Aid and the Shopwell are less than a mile from our house, in a little neighborhood strip mall which also supports a video store, a used-book store named Spread It Around (they do a very brisk business in my old paperbacks), a Radio Shack, and a Fast Foto. It's on Up-Mile Hill, at the intersection of Witcham and Jackson.
She parked in front of Blockbuster Video, went into the drugstore, and did business with Mr. Joe Wyzer, who was the druggist in those days; he has since moved on to the Rite Aid in Bangor. At the checkout she picked up one of those little chocolates with marshmallow inside, this one in the shape of a mouse.
I found it later, in her purse. I unwrapped it and ate it myself, sitting at the kitchen table with the contents of her red handbag spread out in front of me, and it was like taking Communion.
When it was gone except for the taste of chocolate on my tongue and in my throat, I burst into tears. I sat there in the litter of her Kleenex and makeup and keys and half-finished rolls of Certs and cried with my hands over my eyes, the way a kid cries.
The sinus inhaler was in a Rite Aid bag. It had cost twelve dollars and eighteen cents. There was something else in the bag, too an item which had cost twenty-two-fifty. I looked at this other item for a long time, seeing it but not understanding it.
I was surprised, maybe even stunned, but the idea that Johanna Arlen Noonan might have been leading another life, one I knew nothing about, never crossed my mind. Not then.
Jo left the register, walked out into the bright, hammering sun again, swapping her regular glasses for her prescription sunglasses as she did, and just as she stepped from beneath the drugstore's slight overhang
(I am imagining a little here, I suppose, crossing over into the country of the novelist a little, but not by much; only by inches, and you can trust me on that), there was that shrewish howl of locked tires on pavement that means there's going to be either an accident or a very close call.
This time it happened the sort of accident which happened at that stupid X-shaped intersection at least once a week, it seemed. A 1989 Toyota was pulling out of the shopping-center parking lot and turning left onto Jackson Street.
Behind the wheel was Mrs. Esther Easterling of Barrett's Orchards. She was accompanied by her friend Mrs Irene Deorsey, also of Barrett's Orchards, who had shopped the video store without finding anything she wanted to rent. Too much violence, Irene said.
Both women were cigarette widows. Esther could hardly have missed the orange Public Works dump truck coming down the hill; although she denied this to the police, to the newspaper, and to me when I talked to her some two months later, I think it likely that she just forgot to look.
As my own mother (another cigarette widow) used to say, 'The two most common ailments of the elderly are arthritis and forgetfulness. They can't be held responsible for neither.'
Driving the Public Works truck was William Fraker, of Old Cape. Mr. Fraker was thirty-eight years old on the day of my wife's death, driving with his shirt off and thinking how badly he wanted a cool shower and a cold beer, not necessarily in that order.
He and three other men had spent eight hours putting down asphalt patch out on the Harris Avenue Extension near the airport, a hot job on a hot day, and Bill Fraker said yeah, he might have been going a little too fast maybe forty in a thirty-mile-an-hour zone.
He was eager to get back to the garage, sign off on the truck, and get behind the wheel of his own F-150, which had air conditioning. Also, the dump truck's brakes, while good enough to pass inspection, were a long way from tip-top condition.
Fraker hit them as soon as he saw the Toyota pull out in front of him (he hit his horn, as well), but it was too late. He heard screaming tires his own, and Esther's as she belatedly realized her danger and saw her face for just a moment.
'That was the worst part, somehow,' he told me as we sat on his porch, drinking beers it was October by then, and although the sun was warm on our faces, we were both wearing sweaters. 'You know how high up you sit in one of those dump trucks? '
I nodded. 'Well, she was looking up to see me craning up, you'd say and the sun was full in her face. I could see how old she was. I remember thinking, 'Holy shit, she's gonna break like glass if I can't stop. '
But old people are tough, more often than not. They can surprise you. I mean, look at how it turned out, both those old biddies still alive, and your wife'
He stopped then, bright red color dashing into his cheeks, making him look like a boy who has been laughed at in the schoolyard by girls who have noticed his fly is unzipped. It was comical, but if I'd smiled, it only would have confused him.
'Mr. Noonan, I'm sorry. My mouth just sort of ran away with me.' 'It's all right,' I told him. 'I'm over the worst of it, anyway. ' That was a lie, but it put us back on track.
'Anyway,' he said, 'we hit. There was a loud bang, and a crumping sound when the driver's side of the car caved in. Breaking glass, too. I was thrown against the wheel hard enough so I couldn't draw a breath without it hurting for a week or more, and I had a big bruise right here.'
He drew an arc on his chest just below the collarbones. 'I banged my head on the windshield hard enough to crack the glass, but all I got up there was a little purple knob no bleeding, not even a headache.
My wife says I've just got a naturally thick skull. I saw the woman driving the Toyota, Mrs. Easterling, thrown across the console between the front bucket seats. Then we were finally stopped, all tangled together in the middle of the street, and I got out to see how bad they were. I tell you, I expected to find them both dead. '
Neither of them was dead, neither of them was even unconscious, although Mrs. Easterling had three broken ribs and a dislocated hip. Mrs. Deorsey, who had been a seat away from the impact, suffered a concussion when she rapped her head on her window. That was all; she was 'treated and released at Home Hospital,' as the Derry News always puts it in such cases.
My wife, the former Johanna Arlen of Malden, Massachusetts, saw it all from where she stood outside the drugstore, with her purse slung over her shoulder and her prescription bag in one hand. Like Bill Fraker, she must have thought the occupants of the Toyota were either dead or seriously hurt.
The sound of the collision had been a hollow, authoritative bang which rolled through the hot afternoon air like a bowling ball down an alley. The sound of breaking glass edged it like jagged lace.
The two vehicles were tangled violently together in the middle of Jackson Street, the dirty orange truck looming over the pale-blue import like a bullying parent over a cowering child.
Others were doing the same all around her. One of them, Miss Jill Dunbarry, had been window-shopping at Radio Shack when the accident occurred. She said she thought she remembered running past Johanna at least she was pretty sure she remembered someone in yellow slacks but she couldn't be sure.
By then, Mrs. Easterling was screaming that she was hurt, they were both hurt, wouldn't somebody help her and her friend Irene. Johanna began to sprint across the parking lot toward the street.
Halfway across the parking lot, near a little cluster of newspaper dispensers, my wife fell down. Her purse-strap stayed over her shoulder, but her prescription bag slipped from her hand, and the sinus inhaler slid halfway out. The other item stayed put.
No one noticed her lying there by the newspaper dispensers; everyone was focused on the tangled vehicles, the screaming women, the spreading puddle of water and antifreeze from the Public Works truck's ruptured radiator. ('That's gas!' the clerk from Fast Foto shouted to anyone who would listen.
'That's gas, watch out she don't blow, fellas!') I suppose one or two of the would-be rescuers might have jumped right over her, perhaps thinking she had fainted. To assume such a thing on a day when the temperature was pushing ninety-five degrees would not have been unreasonable.
Roughly two dozen people from the shopping center clustered around the accident; another four dozen or so came running over from Strawford Park, where a baseball game had been going on.
I imagine that all the things you would expect to hear in such situations were said, many of them more than once. Milling around. Someone reaching through the misshapen hole which had been the driver's-side window to pat Esther's trembling old hand.
People immediately giving way for Joe Wyzer; at such moments anyone in a white coat automatically becomes the belle of the ball. In the distance, the warble of an ambulance siren rising like shaky air over an incinerator.
All during this, lying unnoticed in the parking lot, was my wife with her purse still over her shoulder (inside, still wrapped in foil, her uneaten chocolate-marshmallow mouse) and her white prescription bag near one outstretched hand.
It was Joe Wyzer, hurrying back to the pharmacy to get a compression bandage for Irene Deorsey's head, who spotted her.
He recognized her even though she was lying face-down. He recognized her by her red hair, white blouse, and yellow slacks. He recognized her because he had waited on her not fifteen minutes before.
'Mrs. Noonan?' he asked, forgetting all about the compression bandage for the dazed but apparently not too badly hurt Irene Deorsey. 'Mrs. Noonan, are you all right?' Knowing already (or so I suspect; perhaps I am wrong) that she was not.
He turned her over. It took both hands to do it, and even then he had to work hard, kneeling and pushing and lifting there in the parking lot with the heat baking down from above and then bouncing back up from the asphalt. Dead people put on weight, it seems to me; both in their flesh and in our minds, they put on weight.
There were red marks on her face. When I identified her I could see them clearly even on the video monitor. I started to ask the assistant medical examiner what they were, but then I knew. Late August, hot pavement, elementary, my dear Watson. My wife died getting a sunburn.
Wyzer got up, saw that the ambulance had arrived, and ran toward it. He pushed his way through the crowd and grabbed one of the attendants as he got out from behind the wheel. 'There's a woman over there,' Wyzer said, pointing toward the parking lot.
'Guy, we've got two women right here, and a man as well,' the attendant said. He tried to pull away, but Wyzer held on. 'Never mind them right now,' he said. 'They're basically okay. The woman over there isn't.'
The woman over there was dead, and I'm pretty sure Joe Wyzer knew it but he had his priorities straight. Give him that. And he was convincing enough to get both paramedics moving away from the tangle of truck and Toyota, in spite of Esther Easterling's cries of pain and the rumbles of protest from the Greek chorus.
When they got to my wife, one of the paramedics was quick to confirm what Joe Wyzer had already suspected. 'Holy shit,' the other one said. 'What happened to her?' 'Heart, most likely,' the first one said. 'She got excited and it just blew out on her. '
But it wasn't her heart. The autopsy revealed a brain aneurysm which she might have been living with, all unknown, for as long as five years. As she sprinted across the parking lot toward the accident, that weak vessel in her cerebral cortex had blown like a tire, drowning her control-centers in blood and killing her.
Death had probably not been instantaneous, the assistant medical examiner told me, but it had still come swiftly enough and she wouldn't have suffered. Just one big black nova, all sensation and thought gone even before she hit the pavement.
'Can I help you in any way, Mr. Noonan?' the assistant ME asked, turning me gently away from the still face and closed eyes on the video monitor. 'Do you have questions? I'll answer them if I can.' 'Just one,' I said.
I told him what she'd purchased in the drugstore just before she died. Then I asked my question. I had one other crying fit a few days after we buried her, and I will tell you about that one shortly.
The days leading up to the funeral and the funeral itself are dreamlike in my memory the clearest memory I have is of eating Jo's chocolate mouse and crying crying mostly, I think, because I knew how soon the taste of it would be gone.
I was glad for the arrival of Jo's family, and particularly for the arrival of her oldest brother, Frank. It was Frank Arlen fifty, red-cheeked, portly, and with a head of lush dark hair who organized the arrangements who wound up actually dickering with the funeral director.
'I can't believe you did that,' I said later, as we sat in a booth at Jack's Pub, drinking beers. 'He was trying to stick it to you, Mikey,' he said. 'I hate guys like that.'
He reached into his back pocket, brought out a handkerchief, and wiped absently at his cheeks with it. He hadn't broken down none of the Arlens broke down, at least not when I was with them but Frank had leaked steadily all day; he looked like a man suffering from severe conjunctivitis.
There had been six Arlen sibs in all, Jo the youngest and the only girl. She had been the pet of her big brothers. I suspect that if I'd had anything to do with her death, the five of them would have torn me apart with their bare hands.
As it was, they formed a protective shield around me instead, and that was good. I suppose I might have muddled through without them, but I don't know how.
I was thirty-six, remember. You don't expect to have to bury your wife when you're thirty-six and she herself is two years younger. Death was the last thing on our minds.
'If a guy gets caught taking your stereo out of your car, they call it theft and put him in jail,' Frank said. The Arlens had come from Massachusetts, and I could still hear Malden in Frank's voice caught was coowat, car was cah, call was caul.
'If the same guy is trying to sell a grieving husband a three-thousand-dollar casket for forty-five hundred dollars, they call it business and ask him to speak at the Rotary Club luncheon. Greedy asshole, I fed him his lunch, didn't I?'
Shortly before five A.M., Augie roused from his own half-doze, stamped his feet to wake them up, and realized an unpleasant iron light had crept into the air. It was the furthest thing in the world from the rosy-fingered dawn of poetry and old Technicolor movies; this was an anti-dawn, damp and as pale as the cheek of a day-old corpse.
He could see the City Center auditorium slowly revealing itself in all its nineteen-seventies tacky architectural glory. He could see the two dozen switchbacks of patiently waiting people and then the tailback of the line disappearing into the fog.
Now there was a little conversation, and when a janitor clad in gray fatigues passed through the lobby on the other side of the doors, a small satiric cheer went up.
"Life is discovered on other planets!" shouted one of the young men who had been staring at Janice Cray--this was Keith Frias, whose left arm would shortly be torn from his body.
There was mild laughter at this sally, and people began to talk. The night was over. The seeping light wasn't particularly encouraging, but it was marginally better than the long small hours just past.
Augie knelt beside his sleeping bag again and cocked an ear. The small, regular snores he heard made him smile. Maybe his worry about her had been for nothing. He guessed there were people who went through life surviving--perhaps even thriving--on the kindness of strangers. The young woman currently snoozing in his sleeping bag with her baby might be one of them.
It came to him that he and Janice Cray could present themselves at the various application tables as a couple. If they did that, the baby's presence might not seem an indicator of irresponsibility but rather of joint dedication. He couldn't say for sure, much of human nature was a mystery to him, but he thought it was possible.
He decided he'd try the idea out on Janice when she woke up. See what she thought. They couldn't claim marriage; she wasn't wearing a wedding ring and he'd taken his off for good three years before, but they could claim to be what was it people said now? Partners.
Cars continued to come up the steep incline from Marlborough Street at steady tick-tock intervals. There would soon be pedestrians as well, fresh off the first bus of the morning. Augie was pretty sure they started running at six.
Because of the thick fog, the arriving cars were just headlights with vague shadow-shapes lurking behind the windshields. A few of the drivers saw the huge crowd already waiting and turned around, discouraged, but most kept on, heading for the few remaining parking spaces, their taillights dwindling.
Then Augie noticed a car-shape that neither turned around nor continued on toward the far reaches of the parking lot. Its unusually bright headlights were flanked by yellow fog-lamps. HD headers, Augie thought. That's a Mercedes-Benz. What's a Benz doing at a job fair?
He supposed it might be Mayor Kinsler, here to make a speech to the Early Birds Club. To congratulate them on their gumption, their good old American git-up-and-git. If so, Augie thought, arriving in his Mercedes--even if it was an old one--was in bad taste.
An elderly fellow in line ahead of Augie (Wayne Welland, now in the last moments of his earthly existence) said: "Is that a Benz? It looks like a Benz." Augie started to say of course it was, you couldn't mistake a Mercedes's HD headlamps, and then the driver of the car directly behind the vague shape laid on his horn--a long, impatient blast.
The HD lights flashed brighter than ever,cutting brilliant white cones through the suspended droplets of the fog, and the car leaped forward as if the impatient horn had goosed it."Hey!" Wayne Welland said, surprised. It was his final word.
The car accelerated directly at the place where the crowd of job-seekers was most tightly packed, and hemmed in by the DO NOT CROSS tapes. Some of them tried to run, but only the ones at the rear of the crowd were able to break free.
Those closer to the doors--the true Early Birds--had no chance. They struck the posts and knocked them over, they got tangled in the tapes, they rebounded off each other. The crowd swayed back and forth in a series of agitated waves. Those who were older and smaller fell down and were trampled underfoot.
Augie was shoved hard to the left, stumbled, recovered, and was pushed forward. A flying elbow struck his cheekbone just below his right eye and that side of his vision filled with bright Fourth of July sparkles.
From the other eye he could see the Mercedes not just emerging from the fog but seeming to create itself from it. A big gray sedan, maybe an SL500, the kind with twelve cylinders, and right now all twelve were screaming.
Augie was driven to his knees beside the sleeping bag, and kicked repeatedly as he struggled to get back up: in the arm, in the shoulder, in the neck. People were screaming. He heard a woman cry, "Look out, look out, he's not stopping!"
He saw Janice Cray pop her head out of the sleeping bag, eyes blinking in bewilderment. Once more he was reminded of a shy mole peering from its hole. A lady mole with a bad case of bed head.
He scrambled forward on his hands and knees and lay down on the bag and the woman and baby inside, as if by doing this he could successfully shield them from a two-ton piece of German engineering.
He heard people yelling, the sound of them almost lost beneath the approaching roar of the big sedan's motor. Someone fetched him a terrific wallop on the back of his head, but he barely felt it. There was time to think: I was going to buy Rose of Sharon breakfast. There was time to think: Maybe he'll veer off.
That seemed to be their best chance, probably their only chance. He started to raise his head to see if it was happening, and a huge black tire ate up his vision. He felt the woman's hand grip his forearm. He had time to hope the baby was still sleeping. Then time ran out.
Hodges walks out of the kitchen with a can of beer in his hand, sits down in the La-Z-Boy, and puts the can down on the little table to his left, next to the gun. It's a .38 Smith & Wesson M&P revolver, M&P standing for Military and Police.
He pats it absently, the way you'd pat an old dog, then picks up the remote control and turns on Channel Seven. He's a little late, and the studio audience is already applauding.
He's thinking of a fad, brief and baleful, that inhabited the city in the late eighties. Or maybe the word he really wants is infected, because it had been like a transient fever. The city's three papers had written editorials about it all one summer. Now two of those papers are gone and the third is on life support.
The host comes striding onstage in a sharp suit, waving to the audience. Hodges has watched this show almost every weekday since his retirement from the police force, and he thinks this man is too bright to be doing this job, one that's a little like scuba diving in a sewer without a wetsuit.
He thinks the host is the sort of man who sometimes commits suicide and afterward all his friends and close relatives say they never had a clue anything was wrong; they talk about how cheerful he was the last time they saw him.
At this thought, Hodges gives the revolver another absent pat. It is the Victory model. An oldie but a goodie. His own gun, when he was active, was a Glock .40. He bought it--officers in this city are expected to buy their service weapons--and now it's in the safe in his bedroom.
Safe in the safe. He unloaded it and put it in there after the retirement ceremony and hasn't looked at it since. No interest. He likes the .38, though. He has a sentimental attachment to it, but there's something beyond that. A revolver never jams.
Here is the first guest, a young woman in a short blue dress. Her face is a trifle on the vacant side but she's got a knockout bod. Somewhere inside that dress, Hodges knows, there will be the sort of tattoo now referred to as a tramp-stamp.
Maybe two or three. The men in the audience whistle and stomp their feet. The women in the audience applaud more gently. Some roll their eyes. This is the kind of woman you don't like to catch your husband staring at.
The woman is pissed right from go. She tells the host that her boyfriend has had a baby with another woman and he goes over to see them all the time. She still loves him, she says, but she hates that--
The next couple of words are bleeped out, but Hodges can lipread fucking whore. The audience cheers. Hodges takes a sip of his beer. He knows what comes next. This show has all the predictability of a soap opera on Friday afternoon.
The host lets her run on for a bit and then introduces THE OTHER WOMAN! She also has a knockout bod and several yards of big blond hair. There's a tramp-stamp on one ankle. She approaches the other woman and says, "I understand how you feel, but I love him, too."
She's got more on her mind, but that's as far as she gets before Knockout Bod One goes into action. Someone offstage rings a bell, as if this were the start of a prizefight. Hodges supposes it is, since all the guests on this show must be compensated; why else would they do it?
The two women punch and claw for a few seconds, and then the two beefcakes with SECURITY printed on their tee-shirts, who have been watching from the background, separate them.
They shout at each other for awhile, a full and fair exchange of views (much of it bleeped out), as the host watches benignly, and this time it's Knockout Bod Two who initiates the fight, swinging a big roundhouse slap that rocks Knockout Bod One's head back. The bell rings again.
They fall to the stage, their dresses rucking up, clawing and punching and slapping. The audience goes bugshit. The security beefcakes separate them and the host gets between them, talking in a voice that is soothing on top, inciteful beneath.
The two women declare the depth of their love, spitting it into each other's faces. The host says they'll be right back and then a C-list actress is selling a diet pill.
Hodges takes another sip of his beer and knows he won't even finish half the can. It's funny, because when he was on the cops, he was damned near an alcoholic. When the drinking broke up his marriage, he assumed he was an alcoholic.
He summoned all his willpower and reined it in, promising himself he would drink just as much as he goddam wanted once he had his forty in--a pretty amazing number, when fifty percent of city cops retired after twenty-five and seventy percent after thirty.
Only now that he has his forty, alcohol no longer interests him much. He forced himself to get drunk a few times, just to see if he could still do it, and he could, but being drunk turned out to be no better than being sober. Actually it was a little worse.
The show returns. The host says he has another guest, and Hodges knows who that will be. The audience does, too. They yap their anticipation. Hodges picks up his father's gun, looks into the barrel, and puts it back down on the DirecTV guide.
The man over whom Knockout Bod One and Knockout Bod Two are in such strenuous conflict emerges from stage right. You knew what he was going to look like even before he comes strutting out and yup, he's the guy: a gas station attendant or a Target warehouse carton-shuffler or maybe the fella who detailed your car (badly) at the Mr. Speedy.
He's skinny and pale, with black hair clumping over his forehead. He's wearing chinos and a crazy green and yellow tie that has a chokehold on his throat just below his prominent Adam's apple. The pointy toes of suede boots poke out beneath his pants.
You knew that the women had tramp-stamps and you know this man is hung like a horse and shoots sperm more powerful than a locomotive and faster than a speeding bullet; a virginal maid who sits on a toilet seat after this guy jerked off will get up pregnant.
Probably with twins. On his face is the half-smart grin of a cool dude in a loose mood. Dream job: lifetime disability. Soon the bell will ring and the women will go at each other again. Later, after they have heard enough of his smack, they will look at each other, nod slightly, and attack him together.
This time the security personnel will wait a little longer, because this final battle is what the audience, both in the studio and at home, really wants to see: the hens going after the rooster.
That brief and baleful fad in the late eighties--the infection--was called "bum fighting." Some gutter genius or other got the idea, and when it turned a profit, three or four other entrepreneurs leaped in to refine the deal.
What you did was pay a couple of bums thirty bucks each to go at each other at a set time and in a set place. The place Hodges remembered best was the service area behind a sleazy crab-farm of a strip club called Bam Ba Lam, over on the East Side.
Once the fight card was set, you advertised (by word of mouth in those days, with widespread Internet use still over the horizon), and charged spectators twenty bucks a head. There had been better than two hundred at the one Hodges and Pete Huntley had busted, most of them making odds and fading each other like mad motherfuckers.
There had been women, too, some in evening dress and loaded with jewelry, watching as those two wetbrain stewbums went at each other, flailing and kicking and falling down and getting up and yelling incoherencies. The crowd had been laughing and cheering and urging the combatants on.
This show is like that, only there are diet pills and insurance companies to fade the action, so Hodges supposes the contestants (that's what they are, although the host calls them "guests") walk away with a little more than thirty bucks and a bottle of Night Train. And there are no cops to break it up, because it's all as legal as lottery tickets.
When the show is over, the take-no-prisoners lady judge will show up, robed in her trademark brand of impatient righteousness, listening with barely suppressed rage to the small-shit petitioners who come before her.
Next up is the fat family psychologist who makes his guests cry (he calls this "breaking through the wall of denial"), and invites them to leave if any of them dare question his methods. Hodges thinks the fat family psychologist might have learned those methods from old KGB training videos.
Hodges eats this diet of full-color shit every weekday afternoon, sitting in the La-Z-Boy with his father's gun--the one Dad carried as a beat cop--on the table beside him. He always picks it up a few times and looks into the barrel.
Inspecting that round darkness. On a couple of occasions he has slid it between his lips, just to see what it feels like to have a loaded gun lying on your tongue and pointing at your palate. Getting used to it, he supposes.
If I could drink successfully, I could put this off, he thinks. I could put it off for at least a year. And if I could put it off for two, the urge might pass. I might get interested in gardening, or birdwatching, or even painting. Tim Quigley took up painting, down in Florida.
In a retirement community that was loaded with old cops. By all accounts Quigley had really enjoyed it, and had even sold some of his work at the Venice Art Festival. Until his stroke, that was. After the stroke he'd spent eight or nine months in bed, paralyzed all down his right side. No more painting for Tim Quigley. Then off he went.
The fight bell is ringing, and sure enough, both women are going after the scrawny guy in the crazy tie, painted fingernails flashing, big hair flying. Hodges reaches for the gun again, but he has no more than touched it when he hears the clack of the front door slot and the flump of the mail hitting the hall floor.
Nothing of importance comes through the mail slot in these days of email and Facebook, but he gets up anyway. He'll look through it and leave his father's M&P .38 for another day.
When Hodges returns to his chair with his small bundle of mail, the fight-show host is saying goodbye and promising his TV Land audience that tomorrow there will be midgets. Whether of the physical or mental variety he does not specify.
Beside the La-Z-Boy there are two small plastic waste containers, one for returnable bottles and cans, the other for trash. Into the trash goes a circular from Walmart promising ROLLBACK PRICES; an offer for burial insurance addressed to OUR FAVORITE NEIGHBOR;
an announcement that all DVDs are going to be fifty percent off for one week only at Discount Electronix; a postcard-sized plea for "your important vote" from a fellow running for a vacancy on the city council.
There's a photograph of the candidate, and to Hodges he looks like Dr. Oberlin, the dentist who terrified him as a child. There's also a circular from Albertsons supermarket. This Hodges puts aside (covering up his father's gun for the time being) because it's loaded with coupons.
The last thing appears to be an actual letter--a fairly thick one, by the feel--in a business-sized envelope. It is addressed to Det. K. William Hodges (Ret.) at 63 Harper Road. There is no return address.
In the upper lefthand corner, where one usually goes, is his second smile-face of the day's mail delivery. Only this one's not the winking Walmart Rollback Smiley but rather the email emoticon of Smiley wearing dark glasses and showing his teeth.
This stirs a memory, and not a good one. No, he thinks. No. But he rips the letter open so fast and hard the envelope tears and four typed pages spill out--not real typing, not typewriter typing, but a computer font that looks like it.
Dear Detective Hodges, the heading reads. He reaches out without looking, knocks the Albertsons circular to the floor, finger-walks across the revolver without even noticing it, and seizes the TV remote. He hits the kill-switch, shutting up the take-no-prisoners lady judge in mid-scold, and turns his attention to the letter.
Dear Detective Hodges, I hope you do not mind me using your title, even though you have been retired for 6 months. I feel that if incompetent judges, venal politicians, and stupid military commanders can keep their titles after retirement, the same should be true for one of the most decorated police officers in the city's history.
So Detective Hodges it shall be! Sir (another title you deserve, for you are a true Knight of the Badge and Gun), I write for many reasons, but must begin by congratulating you on your years of service, 27 as a detective and 40 in all.
I saw some of the Retirement Ceremony on TV (Public Access Channel 2, a resource overlooked by many), and happen to know there was a party at the Raintree Inn out by the airport the following night. I bet that was the real Retirement Ceremony!
I have certainly never attended such a "bash," but I watch a lot of TV cop shows, and while I am sure many of them present a very fictional picture of "the policeman's lot," several have shown such retirement parties (NYPD Blue, Homicide, The Wire, etc., etc.), and I like to think they are ACCURATE portrayals of how the Knights of the Badge and Gun say "so-long" to one of their compatriots.
I think they might be, because I have also read "retirement party scenes" in at least two Joseph Wambaugh books, and they are similar. He should know because he, like you, is a "Det. Ret."
I imagine balloons hanging from the ceiling, a lot of drinking, a lot of bawdy conversation, and plenty of reminiscing about the Old Days and the old cases. There is probably lots of loud and happy music, and possibly a stripper or two "shaking her tailfeathers."
There are probably speeches that are a lot funnier and a lot truer than the ones at the "stuffed shirt ceremony." How am I doing? Not bad, Hodges thinks. Not bad at all.
According to my research, during your time as a detective, you broke literally hundreds of cases, many of them the kind the press (who Ted Williams called the Knights of the Keyboard) terms "high profile." You have caught Killers and Robbery Gangs and Arsonists and Rapists.
In one article (published to coincide with your Retirement Ceremony), your longtime partner (Det. 1st Grade Peter Huntley) described you as "a combination of by-the-book and intuitively brilliant." A nice compliment!
If it is true, and I think it is, you will have figured out by now that I am one of those few you did not catch. I am, in fact, the man the press chose to call a.) The Joker b.) The Clown c.) The Mercedes Killer. I prefer the last!
I am sure you gave it "your best shot," but sadly (for you, not me), you failed. I imagine if there was ever a "perk" you wanted to catch, Detective Hodges, it was the man who deliberately drove into the Job Fair crowd at City Center last year, killing eight and wounding so many more. (I must say I exceeded my own wildest expectations.)
Was I on your mind when they gave you that plaque at the Official Retirement Ceremony? Was I on your mind when your fellow Knights of the Badge and Gun were telling stories about (just guessing here) criminals who were caught with their pants actually down or funny practical jokes that were played in the good old Squad Room? I bet I was!
I have to tell you how much fun it was. (I'm being honest here.) When I "put the pedal to the metal" and drove poor Mrs. Olivia Trelawney's Mercedes at that crowd of people, I had the biggest "hard-on" of my life! And was my heart beating 200 a minute? "Hope to tell ya!" Here was another Mr. Smiley in sunglasses.
I'll tell you something that's true "inside dope," and if you want to laugh, go ahead, because it is sort of funny (although I think it also shows just how careful I was). I was wearing a condom! A "rubber"! Because I was afraid of Spontaneous Ejaculation, and the DNA that might result!
Well, that did not happen, but I have masturbated many times since while thinking of how they tried to run and couldn't (they were packed in like sardines), and how scared they all looked (that was so funny), and the way I jerked forward when the car "plowed" into them. So hard the seatbelt locked. Gosh it was exciting.
To tell the truth, I didn't know what might happen. I thought the chances were 50-50 that I would get caught. But I am "a cockeyed optimist," and I prepared for Success rather than Failure.
The condom is "inside dope," but I bet your Forensics Department (I also watch CSI) was pretty darn disappointed when they didn't get any DNA from inside the clown mask. They must have said, "Damn! That crafty perk must have been wearing a hair net underneath!" And so I was! I also washed it out with BLEACH!
I still relive the thuds that resulted from hitting them, and the crunching noises, and the way the car bounced on its springs when it went over the bodies. For power and control, give me a Mercedes 12-cylinder every time! When I saw in the paper that a baby was one of my victims, I was delighted!!
To snuff out a life that young! Think of all she missed, eh? Patricia Cray, RIP! Got the mom, too!
Strawberry jam in a sleeping bag! What a thrill, eh? I also enjoy thinking of the man who lost his arm and even more of the two who are paralyzed. The man only from the waist down, but Martine Stover is now your basic "head on a stick!" They didn't die but probably WISH they did! How about that, Detective Hodges?
Now you are probably thinking, "What kind of sick and twisted Pervo do we have here?" Can't really blame you, but we could argue about that! I think a great many people would enjoy doing what I did, and that is why they enjoy books and movies (and even TV shows these days) that feature Torture and Dismemberment, etc.
The only difference is I really did it. Not because I'm mad, though (in either sense of the word). Just because I didn't know exactly what the experience would be like, only that it would be totally thrilling, with "memories to last a lifetime," as they say.
Most people are fitted with Lead Boots when they are just little kids and have to wear them all their lives. These Lead Boots are called A CONSCIENCE. I have none, so I can soar high above the heads of the Normal Crowd. And if they had caught me? Well if it had been right there, if Mrs.
Trelawney's Mercedes had stalled or something (small chance of that as it seemed very well maintained), I suppose the crowd might have torn me apart, I understood that possibility going in, and it added to the excitement. But I didn't think they really would, because most people are sheep and sheep don't eat meat. (I suppose I might have been beaten up a little, but I can take a beating.)
Probably I would have been arrested and gone to trial, where I would have pleaded insanity. Maybe I even am insane (the idea has certainly crossed my mind), but it is a peculiar kind of insanity. Anyway, the coin came down heads and I got away.
Join Douglas Adams's hapless hero Arthur Dent as he travels the galaxy with his intrepid pal Ford Prefect, getting into horrible messes and generally wreaking hilarious havoc. Dent is grabbed from Earth moments before a cosmic construction team obliterates the planet to build a freeway.
You'll never read funnier science fiction; Adams is a master of intelligent satire, barbed wit, and comedic dialogue. The Hitchhiker's Guide is rich in comedic detail and thought-provoking situations and stands up to multiple reads. Required reading for science fiction fans, this book (and its follow-ups) is also sure to please fans of Monty Python, Terry Pratchett's Discworld series, and British sitcoms.
A Guide to the Guide. Some Unhelpful Remarks from the Author. The history of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is now so complicated that every time I tell it I contradict myself, and whenever I do get it right I'm misquoted. So the publication of this omnibus edition seemed like a good opportunity to set the record straight--or at least firmly crooked. Anything that is put down wrong here is, as far as I'm concerned, wrong for good.
The idea for the title first cropped up while I was lying drunk in a field in Innsbruck, Austria, in 1971. Not particularly drunk, just the sort of drunk you get when you have a couple of stiff Gossers after not having eaten for two days straight, on account of being a penniless hitchhiker. We are talking of a mild inability to stand up.
I was traveling with a copy of the Hitch Hiker's Guide to Europe by Ken Walsh, a very battered copy that I had borrowed from someone. In fact, since this was 1971 and I still have the book, it must count as stolen by now. I didn't have a copy of Europe on Five Dollars a Day (as it then was) because I wasn't in that financial league.
Night was beginning to fall on my field as it spun lazily underneath me. I was wondering where I could go that was cheaper than Innsbruck, revolved less and didn't do the sort of things to me that Innsbruck had done to me that afternoon. What had happened was this.
I had been walking through the town trying to find a particular address, and being thoroughly lost I stopped to ask for directions from a man in the street. I knew this mightn't be easy because I don't speak German, but I was still surprised to discover just how much difficulty I was having communicating with this particular man.
Gradually the truth dawned on me as we struggled in vain to understand each other that of all the people in Innsbruck I could have stopped to ask, the one I had picked did not speak English, did not speak French and was also deaf and dumb.
With a series of sincerely apologetic hand movements, I disentangled myself, and a few minutes later, on another street, I stopped and asked another man who also turned out to be deaf and dumb, which was when I bought the beers. I ventured back onto the street. I tried again.
When the third man I spoke to turned out to be deaf and dumb and also blind I began to feel a terrible weight settling on my shoulders; wherever I looked the trees and buildings took on dark and menacing aspects.
I pulled my coat tightly around me and hurried lurching down the street, whipped by a sudden gusting wind. I bumped into someone and stammered an apology, but he was deaf and dumb and unable to understand me. The sky loured. The pavement seemed to tip and spin.
If I hadn't happened then to duck down a side street and pass a hotel where a convention for the deaf was being held, there is every chance that my mind would have cracked completely and I would have spent the rest of my life writing the sort of books for which Kafka became famous and dribbling.
As it is I went to lie in a field, along with my Hitch Hiker's Guide to Europe, and when the stars came out it occurred to me that if only someone would write a Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy as well, then I for one would be off like a shot. Having had this thought I promptly fell asleep and forgot about it for six years.
I went to Cambridge University. I took a number of baths--and a degree in English. I worried a lot about girls and what had happened to my bike. Later I became a writer and worked on a lot of things that were almost incredibly successful but in fact just failed to see the light of day. Other writers will know what I mean.
My pet project was to write something that would combine comedy and science fiction, and it was this obsession that drove me into deep debt and despair. No one was interested, except finally one man a BBC radio producer named Simon Brett who had had the same idea, comedy and science fiction.
Although Simon only produced the first episode before leaving the BBC to concentrate on his own writing (he is best known in the United Stares for his excellent Charles Paris detective novels), I owe him an immense debt of gratitude for simply getting the thing to happen in the first place. He was succeeded by the legendary Geoffrey Perkins.
In its original form the show was going to be rather different. I was feeling a little disgruntled with the world at the time and had put together about six different plots, each of which ended with the destruction of the world in a different way, and for a different reason. It was to be called "The Ends of the Earth".
While I was filling in the details of the first plot--in which the Earth was demolished to make way for a new hyperspace express route--I realized that I needed to have someone from another planet around to tell the reader what was going on, to give the story the context it needed. So I had to work out who he was and what he was doing on the Earth.
I decided to call him Ford Prefect. (This was a joke that missed American audiences entirely, of course, since they had never heard of the rather oddly named little car, and many thought it was a typing error for Perfect.)
I explained in the text that the minimal research my alien character had done before arriving on this planet had led him to think that this name would be "nicely inconspicuous." He had simply mistaken the dominant life form.
So how would such a mistake arise? I remembered when I used to hitchhike through Europe and would often find that the information or advice that came my way was out of date or misleading in some way. Most of it, of course, just came from stories of other people's travel experiences.
At that point the title The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy suddenly popped back into my mind from wherever it had been hiding all this time. Ford, I decided, would be a researcher who collected data for the Guide. As soon as I started to develop this particular notion, it moved inexorably to the center of the story, and the rest, as the creator of the original Ford Prefect would say, is bunk.
The story grew in the most convoluted way, as many people will be surprised to learn. Writing episodically meant that when I finished one episode I had no idea about what the next one would contain. When, in the twists and turns of the plot, some event suddenly seemed to illuminate things that had gone before, I was as surprised as anyone else.
I think that the BBC's attitude toward the show while it was in production was very similar to that which Macbeth had toward murdering people--initial doubts, followed by cautious enthusiasm and then greater and greater alarm at the sheer scale of the undertaking and still no end in sight.
Reports that Geoffrey and I and the sound engineers were buried in a subterranean studio for weeks on end, taking as long to produce a single sound effect as other people took to produce an entire series (and stealing everybody else's studio time in which to do so), were all vigorously denied but absolutely true.
The budget of the series escalated to the point that it could have practically paid for a few seconds of Dallas. If the show hadn't worked. The first episode went out on BBC Radio 4 at 10:30 P.M. on Wednesday, March 8, 1978, in a huge blaze of no publicity at all. Bats heard it. The odd dog barked.
After a couple of weeks a letter or two trickled in. So--someone out there had listened. People I talked to seemed to like Marvin the Paranoid Android, whom I had written in as a one-scene joke and had only developed further at Geoffrey's insistence.
Then some publishers became interested, and I was commissioned by Pan Books in England to write up the series in book form. After a lot of procrastination and hiding and inventing excuses and having baths, I managed to get about two-thirds of it done.
At this point they said, very pleasantly and politely, that I had already passed ten deadlines, so would I please just finish the page I was on and let them have the damn thing.
Meanwhile, I was busy trying to write another series and was also writing and script editing the TV series "Dr. Who," because while it was all very pleasant to have your own radio series, especially one that somebody had written in to say they had heard, it didn't exactly buy you lunch.
So that was more or less the situation when the book The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy was published in England in September 1979 and appeared on the Sunday Times mass market best-seller list at number one and just stayed there. Clearly, somebody had been listening.
This is where things start getting complicated, and this is what I was asked, in writing this Introduction, to explain. The Guide has appeared in so many forms--books, radio, a television series, records and soon to be a major motion picture--each time with a different story line that even its most acute followers have become baffled at times.
Here then is a breakdown of the different versions--not including the various stage versions, which haven't been seen in the States and only complicate the matter further.
The radio series began in England in March 1978. The first series consisted of six programs, or "fits" as they were called. Fits 1 thru 6. Easy. Later that year, one more episode was recorded and broadcast, commonly known as the Christmas episode.
It contained no reference of any kind to Christmas. It was called the Christmas episode because it was first broadcast on December 24, which is not Christmas Day. After this, things began to get increasingly complicated.
In the fall of 1979, the first Hitchhiker book was published in England, called The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. It was a substantially expanded version of the first four episodes of the radio series, in which some of the characters behaved in entirely different ways and others behaved in exactly the same ways but for entirely different reasons, which amounts to the same thing but saves rewriting the dialogue.
At roughly the same time a double record album was released, which was, by contrast, a slightly contracted version of the first four episodes of the radio series. These were not the recordings that were originally broadcast but wholly new recordings of substantially the same scripts.
This was done because we had used music off gramophone records as incidental music for the series, which is fine on radio, but makes commercial release impossible. In January 1980, five new episodes of "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" were broadcast on BBC Radio, all in one week, bringing the total number to twelve episodes.
In the fall of 1980, the second Hitchhiker book was published in England, around the same time that Harmony Books published the first book in the United States. It was a very substantially reworked, reedited and contracted version of episodes 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 5 and 6 (in that order) of the radio series "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy."
In case that seemed too straightforward, the book was called The Restaurant at the End of the Universe, because it included the material from radio episodes of "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy," which was set in a restaurant called Milliways, otherwise known as the Restaurant at the End of the Universe.
At roughly the same time, a second record album was made featuring a heavily rewritten and expanded version of episodes 5 and 6 of the radio series. This record album was also called The Restaurant at the End of the Universe.
Meanwhile, a series of six television episodes of "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" was made by the BBC and broadcast in January 1981. This was based, more or less, on the first six episodes of the radio series.
In other words, it incorporated most of the book The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and the second half of the book The Restaurant at be End of the Universe. Therefore, though it followed the basic structure of the radio series, it incorporated revisions from the books, which didn't.
In January 1982 Harmony Books published The Restaurant at the End of the Universe in the United States. In the summer of 1982, a third Hitchhiker book was published simultaneously in England and the United States, called Life, the Universe and Everything.
This was not based on anything that had already been heard or seen on radio or television. In fact it flatly contradicted episodes 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 of the radio series. These episodes of "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy," you will remember, had already been incorporated in revised form in the book called The Restaurant at the End of the Universe.
At this point I went to America to write a film screenplay which was completely inconsistent with most of what has gone on so far, and since that film was then delayed in the making (a rumor currently has it that filming will start shortly before the Last Trump)
I wrote a fourth and last book in the trilogy, So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish. This was published in Britain and the USA in the fall of 1984 and it effectively contradicted everything to date, up to and including itself.
As if this all were not enough I wrote a computer game for Infocom called The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, which bore only fleeting resemblances to anything that had previously gone under that title, and in collaboration with Geoffrey Perkins assembled The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: The Original Radio Scripts (published in England and the USA in 1985).
Now this was an interesting venture. The book is, as the title suggests, a collection of all the radio scripts, as broadcast, and it is therefore the only example of one Hitchhiker publication accurately and consistently reflecting another.
I feel a little uncomfortable with this--which is why the introduction to that book was written after the final and definitive one you are now reading and, of course, flatly contradicts it. People often ask me how they can leave the planet, so I have prepared some brief notes.
How to Leave the Planet. 1. Phone NASA. Their phone number is (713) 483-3111. Explain that it's very important that you get away as soon as possible. 2. If they do not cooperate, phone any friend you may have in the White House--(202) 456-1414--to have a word on your behalf with the guys at NASA.
3. If you don't have any friends in the White House, phone the Kremlin (ask the overseas operator for 0107-095-295-9051). They don't have any friends there either (at least, none to speak of), but they do seem to have a little influence, so you may as well try.
4. If that also fails, phone the Pope for guidance. His telephone number is 011-39-6-6982, and I gather his switchboard is infallible. 5. If all these attempts fail, flag down a passing flying saucer and explain that it's vitally important you get away before your phone bill arrives.
Far out in the uncharted backwaters of the unfashionable end of the western spiral arm of the Galaxy lies a small unregarded yellow sun. Orbiting this at a distance of roughly ninety-two million miles is an utterly insignificant little blue green planet whose ape-descended life forms are so amazingly primitive that they still think digital watches are a pretty neat idea.
This planet has--or rather had--a problem, which was this: most of the people on it were unhappy for pretty much of the time. Many solutions were suggested for this problem, but most of these were largely concerned with the movements of small green pieces of paper, which is odd because on the whole it wasn't the small green pieces of paper that were unhappy.
And so the problem remained; lots of the people were mean, and most of them were miserable, even the ones with digital watches.
Many were increasingly of the opinion that they'd all made a big mistake in coming down from the trees in the first place. And some said that even the trees had been a bad move, and that no one should ever have left the oceans.
And then, one Thursday, nearly two thousand years after one man had been nailed to a tree for saying how great it would be to be nice to people for a change, one girl sitting on her own in a small cafe in Rickmansworth suddenly realized what it was that had been going wrong all this time, and she finally knew how the world could be made a good and happy place. This time it was right, it would work, and no one would have to get nailed to anything.
Sadly, however, before she could get to a phone to tell anyone about it, a terribly stupid catastrophe occurred, and the idea was lost forever. This is not her story. But it is the story of that terrible stupid catastrophe and some of its consequences.
It is also the story of a book, a book called The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy--not an Earth book, never published on Earth, and until the terrible catastrophe occurred, never seen or heard of by any Earthman. Nevertheless, a wholly remarkable book.
In fact it was probably the most remarkable book ever to come out of the great publishing houses of Ursa Minor--of which no Earthman had ever heard either.
Not only is it a wholly remarkable book, it is also a highly successful one--more popular than the Celestial Home Care Omnibus, better selling than Fifty More Things to do in Zero Gravity, and more controversial than Oolon Colluphid's trilogy of philosophical blockbusters Where God Went Wrong, Some More of God's Greatest Mistakes and Who is this God Person Anyway?
In many of the more relaxed civilizations on the Outer Eastern Rim of the Galaxy, the Hitch Hiker's Guide has already supplanted the great Encyclopedia Galactica as the standard repository of all knowledge and wisdom, for though it has many omissions and contains much that is apocryphal, or at least wildly inaccurate, it scores over the older, more pedestrian work in two important respects.
On this particular Thursday, something was moving quietly through the ionosphere many miles above the surface of the planet; several somethings in fact, several dozen huge yellow chunky slablike somethings, huge as office buildings, silent as birds. They soared with ease, basking in electromagnetic rays from the star Sol, biding their time, grouping, preparing.
The planet beneath them was almost perfectly oblivious of their presence, which was just how they wanted it for the moment. The huge yellow somethings went unnoticed at Goonhilly, they passed over Cape Canaveral without a blip, Woomera and Jodrell Bank looked straight through them--which was a pity because it was exactly the sort of thing they'd been looking for all these years.
The only place they registered at all was on a small black device called a Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic which winked away quietly to itself. It nestled in the darkness inside a leather satchel which Ford Prefect wore habitually round his neck.
The contents of Ford Prefect's satchel were quite interesting in fact and would have made any Earth physicist's eyes pop out of his head, which is why he always concealed them by keeping a couple of dog-eared scripts for plays he pretended he was auditioning for stuffed in the top.
Besides the Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic and the scripts he had an Electronic Thumb--a short squat black rod, smooth and matt with a couple of flat switches and dials at one end; he also had a device which looked rather like a largish electronic calculator.
This had about a hundred tiny flat press buttons and a screen about four inches square on which any one of a million "pages" could be summoned at a moment's notice. It looked insanely complicated, and this was one of the reasons why the snug plastic cover it fitted into had the words Don't Panic printed on it in large friendly letters.
The other reason was that this device was in fact that most remarkable of all books ever to come out of the great publishing corporations of Ursa Minor--The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. The reason why it was published in the form of a micro sub meson electronic component is that if it were printed in normal book form, an interstellar hitch hiker would require several inconveniently large buildings to carry it around in.
Beneath that in Ford Prefect's satchel were a few biros, a notepad, and a largish bath towel from Marks and Spencer. The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy has a few things to say on the subject of towels.
A towel, it says, is about the most massively useful thing an interstellar hitch hiker can have. Partly it has great practical value--you can wrap it around you for warmth as you bound across the cold moons of Jaglan Beta;
you can lie on it on the brilliant marble-sanded beaches of Santraginus V, inhaling the heady sea vapours; you can sleep under it beneath the stars which shine so redly on the desert world of Kakrafoon; use it to sail a mini raft down the slow heavy river Moth;
wet it for use in hand-to-hand-combat; wrap it round your head to ward off noxious fumes or to avoid the gaze of the Ravenous Bugblatter Beast of Traal (a mindboggingly stupid animal, it assumes that if you can't see it, it can't see you--daft as a bush, but very ravenous); you can wave your towel in emergencies as a distress signal, and of course dry yourself off with it if it still seems to be clean enough.
More importantly, a towel has immense psychological value. For some reason, if a strag (strag: non-hitch hiker) discovers that a hitch hiker has his towel with him, he will automatically assume that he is also in possession of a toothbrush, face flannel, soap, tin of biscuits, flask, compass, map, ball of string, gnat spray, wet weather gear, space suit etc., etc.
Furthermore, the strag will then happily lend the hitch hiker any of these or a dozen other items that the hitch hiker might accidentally have "lost". What the strag will think is that any man who can hitch the length and breadth of the galaxy, rough it, slum it, struggle against terrible odds, win through, and still knows where his towel is is clearly a man to be reckoned with.
Hence a phrase which has passed into hitch hiking slang, as in "Hey, you sass that hoopy Ford Prefect? There's a frood who really knows where his towel is." (Sass: know, be aware of, meet, have sex with; hoopy: really together guy; frood: really amazingly together guy.)
Nestling quietly on top of the towel in Ford Prefect's satchel, the Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic began to wink more quickly. Miles above the surface of the planet the huge yellow somethings began to fan out. At Jodrell Bank, someone decided it was time for a nice relaxing cup of tea.
"You got a towel with you?" said Ford Prefect suddenly to Arthur. Arthur, struggling through his third pint, looked round at him. "Why? What, no . . . should I have?" He had given up being surprised, there didn't seem to be any point any longer.
At that moment the dull sound of a rumbling crash from outside filtered through the low murmur of the pub, through the sound of the jukebox, through the sound of the man next to Ford hiccupping over the whisky Ford had eventually bought him.
Ford was very kind--he gave the barman another five-pound note and told him to keep the change. The barman looked at it and then looked at Ford. He suddenly shivered: he experienced a momentary sensation that he didn't understand because no one on Earth had ever experienced it before.
In moments of great stress, every life form that exists gives out a tiny sublimal signal. This signal simply communicates an exact and almost pathetic sense of how far that being is from the place of his birth.
On Earth it is never possible to be further than sixteen thousand miles from your birthplace, which really isn't very far, so such signals are too minute to be noticed. Ford Prefect was at this moment under great stress, and he was born 600 light years away in the near vicinity of Betelgeuse.
The barman reeled for a moment, hit by a shocking, incomprehensible sense of distance. He didn't know what it meant, but he looked at Ford Prefect with a new sense of respect, almost awe. "Are you serious, sir?" he said in a small whisper which had the effect of silencing the pub. "You think the world's going to end?"
Whatever it was raced across the sky in monstrous yellowness, tore the sky apart with mind-buggering noise and leapt off into the distance leaving the gaping air to shut behind it with a bang that drove your ears six feet into your skull.
It's difficult to say exactly what the people on the surface of the planet were doing now, because they didn't really know what they were doing themselves. None of it made a lot of sense--running into houses, running out of houses, howling noiselessly at the noise.
All around the world city streets exploded with people, cars slewed into each other as the noise fell on them and then rolled off like a tidal wave over hills and valleys, deserts and oceans, seeming to flatten everything it hit.
Only one man stood and watched the sky, stood with terrible sadness in his eyes and rubber bungs in his ears. He knew exactly what was happening and had known ever since his Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic had started winking in the dead of night beside his pillar and woken him with a start.
It was what he had waited for all these years, but when he had deciphered the signal pattern sitting alone in his small dark room a coldness had gripped him and squeezed his heart. Of all the races in all of the Galaxy who could have come and said a big hello to planet Earth, he thought, didn't it just have to be the Vogons.
Still he knew what he had to do. As the Vogon craft screamed through the air high above him he opened his satchel. He threw away a copy of Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat, he threw away a copy of Godspell: He wouldn't need them where he was going. Everything was ready, everything was prepared.
He knew where his towel was. A sudden silence hit the Earth. If anything it was worse than the noise. For a while nothing happened. The great ships hung motionless in the air, over every nation on Earth.
Motionless they hung, huge, heavy, steady in the sky, a blasphemy against nature. Many people went straight into shock as their minds tried to encompass what they were looking at. The ships hung in the sky in much the same way that bricks don't.
And still nothing happened. Then there was a slight whisper, a sudden spacious whisper of open ambient sound. Every hi-fi set in the world, every radio, every television, every cassette recorder, every woofer, every tweeter, every mid-range driver in the world quietly turned itself on.
Every tin can, every dust bin, every window, every car, every wine glass, every sheet of rusty metal became activated as an acoustically perfect sounding board.
Before the Earth passed away it was going to be treated to the very ultimate in sound reproduction, the greatest public address system ever built. But there was no concert, no music, no fanfare, just a simple message.
"People of Earth, your attention please," a voice said, and it was wonderful. Wonderful perfect quadrophonic sound with distortion levels so low as to make a brave man weep.
"This is Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz of the Galactic Hyperspace Planning Council," the voice continued. "As you will no doubt be aware, the plans for development of the outlying regions of the Galaxy require the building of a hyperspatial express route through your star system, and regrettably your planet is one of those scheduled for demolition. The process will take slightly less that two of your Earth minutes. Thank you."
Uncomprehending terror settled on the watching people of Earth. The terror moved slowly through the gathered crowds as if they were iron fillings on a sheet of board and a magnet was moving beneath them. Panic sprouted again, desperate fleeing panic, but there was nowhere to flee to.
"There's no point in acting all surprised about it. All the planning charts and demolition orders have been on display in your local planning department on Alpha Centauri for fifty of your Earth years, so you've had plenty of time to lodge any formal complaint and it's far too late to start making a fuss about it now."
The PA fell silent again and its echo drifted off across the land. The huge ships turned slowly in the sky with easy power. On the underside of each a hatchway opened, an empty black space.
By this time somebody somewhere must have manned a radio transmitter, located a wavelength and broadcasted a message back to the Vogon ships, to plead on behalf of the planet. Nobody ever heard what they said, they only heard the reply. The PA slammed back into life again. The voice was annoyed.
"What do you mean you've never been to Alpha Centauri? For heaven's sake mankind, it's only four light years away, you know. I'm sorry, but if you can't be bothered to take an interest in local affairs that's your own lookout.
Far away on the opposite spiral arm of the Galaxy, five hundred thousand light years from the star Sol, Zaphod Beeblebrox, President of the Imperial Galactic Government, sped across the seas of Damogran, his ion drive delta boat winking and flashing in the Damogran sun.
Damogran, secret home of the Heart of Gold. The boat sped on across the water. It would be some time before it reached its destination because Damogran is such an inconveniently arranged planet. It consists of nothing but middling to large desert islands separated by very pretty but annoyingly wide stretches of ocean.
Because of this topological awkwardness Damogran has always remained a deserted planet. This is why the Imperial Galactic Government chose Damogran for the Heart of Gold project, because it was so deserted and the Heart of Gold was so secret.
Zaphod Beeblebrox was on his way from the tiny spaceport on Easter Island (the name was an entirely meaningless coincidence--in Galacticspeke, easter means small flat and light brown) to the Heart of Gold island, which by another meaningless coincidence was called France.
The boat zipped and skipped across the sea, the sea that lay between the main islands of the only archipelago of any useful size on the whole planet. One of the side effects of work on the Heart of Gold was a whole string of pretty meaningless coincidences.
But it was not in any way a coincidence that today, the day of culmination of the project, the great day of unveiling, the day that the Heart of Gold was finally to be introduced to a marvelling Galaxy, was also a great day of culmination for Zaphod Beeblebrox.
It was for the sake of this day that he had first decided to run for the Presidency, a decision which had sent waves of astonishment throughout the Imperial Galaxy. Zaphod Beeblebrox? President? Not the Zaphod Beeblebrox? Not the President? Many had seen it as a clinching proof that the whole of known creation had finally gone bananas.
Zaphod grinned and gave the boat an extra kick of speed. Zaphod Beeblebrox, adventurer, ex-hippy, good timer, (crook? quite possibly), manic self-publicist, terribly bad at personal relationships, often thought to be completely out to lunch. President? No one had gone bananas, not in that way at least.
Only six people in the entire Galaxy understood the principle on which the Galaxy was governed, and they knew that once Zaphod Beeblebrox had announced his intention to run as President it was more or less a fait accompli: he was the ideal Presidency fodder1.
Today was the day; today was the day when they would realize what Zaphod had been up to. Today was what Zaphod Beeblebrox's Presidency was all about. Today was also his two hundredth birthday, but that was just another meaningless coincidence.
As he skipped his boat across the seas of Damogran he smiled quietly to himself about what a wonderful exciting day it was going to be. He relaxed and spread his two arms lazily across the seat back. He steered with an extra arm he'd recently fitted just beneath his right one to help improve his ski-boxing.
The island of France was about twenty miles long, five miles across the middle, sandy and crescent shaped. In fact it seemed to exist not so much as an island in its own right as simply a means of defining the sweep and curve of a huge bay.
This impression was heightened by the fact that the inner coastline of the crescent consisted almost entirely of steep cliffs. From the top of the cliff the land sloped slowly down five miles to the opposite shore. On top of the cliffs stood a reception committee.
It consisted in large part of the engineers and researchers who had built the Heart of Gold--mostly humanoid, but here and there were a few reptiloid atomineers, two or three green slyph-like maximegalacticans, an octopoid physucturalist or two and a Hooloovoo (a Hooloovoo is a super-intelligent shade of the color blue).
All except the Hooloovoo were resplendent in their multi-colored ceremonial lab coats; the Hooloovoo had been temporarily refracted into a free standing prism for the occasion.
There was a mood of immense excitement thrilling through all of them. Together and between them they had gone to and beyond the furthest limits of physical laws, restructured the fundamental fabric of matter, strained, twisted and broken the laws of possibility and impossibility, but still the greatest excitement of all seemed to be to meet a man with an orange sash round his neck.
An orange sash was what the President of the Galaxy traditionally wore. It might not even have made much difference to them if they'd known exactly how much power the President of the Galaxy actually wielded: none at all. Only six people in the Galaxy knew that the job of the Galactic President was not to wield power but to attract attention away from it.
Zaphod Beeblebrox was amazingly good at his job. The crowd gasped, dazzled by sun and seemanship, as the Presidential speedboat zipped round the headland into the bay. It flashed and shone as it came skating over the sea in wide skidding turns.
In fact it didn't need to touch the water at all, because it was supported on a hazy cushion of ionized atoms--but just for effect it was fitted with thin finblades which could be lowered into the water. They slashed sheets of water hissing into the air, carved deep gashes into the sea which swayed crazily and sank back foaming into the boat's wake as it careered across the bay.
Zaphod loved effect: it was what he was best at.He twisted the wheel sharply, the boat slewed round in a wild scything skid beneath the cliff face and dropped to rest lightly on the rocking waves.
Within seconds he ran out onto the deck and waved and grinned at over three billion people. The three billion people weren't actually there, but they watched his every gesture through the eyes of a small robot tri-D camera which hovered obsequiously in the air nearby.
The antics of the President always made amazingly popular tri-D; that's what they were for.He grinned again. Three billion and six people didn't know it, but today would be a bigger antic than anyone had bargained for.
The robot camera homed in for a close up on the more popular of his two heads and he waved again. He was roughly humanoid in appearance except for the extra head and third arm. His fair tousled hair stuck out in random directions, his blue eyes glinted with something completely unidentifiable, and his chins were almost always unshaven.
A twenty-foot-high transparent globe floated next to his boat, rolling and bobbing, glistening in the brilliant sun. Inside it floated a wide semi-circular sofa upholstered in glorious red leather: the more the globe bobbed and rolled, the more the sofa stayed perfectly still, steady as an upholstered rock. Again, all done for effect as much as anything.
Zaphod stepped through the wall of the globe and relaxed on the sofa. He spread his two arms lazily along the back and with the third brushed some dust off his knee. His heads looked about, smiling; he put his feet up. At any moment, he thought, he might scream.
Water boiled up beneath the bubble, it seethed and spouted. The bubble surged into the air, bobbing and rolling on the water spout. Up, up it climbed, throwing stilts of light at the cliff. Up it surged on the jet, the water falling from beneath it, crashing back into the sea hundreds of feet below.
Zaphod smiled, picturing himself. A thoroughly ridiculous form of transport, but a thoroughly beautiful one. At the top of the cliff the globe wavered for a moment, tipped on to a railed ramp, rolled down it to a small concave platform and riddled to a halt.
To tremendous applause Zaphod Beeblebrox stepped out of the bubble, his orange sash blazing in the light. The President of the Galaxy had arrived. He waited for the applause to die down, then raised his hands in greeting. "Hi," he said.
A government spider sidled up to him and attempted to press a copy of his prepared speech into his hands. Pages three to seven of the original version were at the moment floating soggily on the Damogran sea some five miles out from the bay.
Pages one and two had been salvaged by a Damogran Frond Crested Eagle and had already become incorporated into an extraordinary new form of nest which the eagle had invented. It was constructed largely of paper and it was virtually impossible for a newly hatched baby eagle to break out of it.
The Damogran Frond Crested Eagle had heard of the notion of survival of the species but wanted no truck with it.Zaphod Beeblebrox would not be needing his set speech and he gently deflected the one being offered him by the spider.
Everyone beamed at him, or, at least, nearly everyone. He singled out Trillian from the crowd. Trillian was a girl that Zaphod had picked up recently whilst visiting a planet, just for fun, incognito.
She was slim, darkish, humanoid, with long waves of black hair, a full mouth, an odd little nob of a nose and ridiculously brown eyes. With her red head scarf knotted in that particular way and her long flowing silky brown dress she looked vaguely Arabic. Not that anyone there had ever heard of an Arab of course.
The Arabs had very recently ceased to exist, and even when they had existed they were five hundred thousand light years from Damogran. Trillian wasn't anybody in particular, or so Zaphod claimed. She just went around with him rather a lot and told him what she thought of him.
"Hi honey," he said to her. She flashed him a quick tight smile and looked away. Then she looked back for a moment and smiled more warmly--but by this time he was looking at something else.
"Hi," he said to a small knot of creatures from the press who were standing nearby wishing that he would stop saying Hi and get on with the quotes. He grinned at them particularly because he knew that in a few moments he would be giving them one hell of a quote.
The next thing he said though was not a lot of use to them. One of the officials of the party had irritably decided that the President was clearly not in a mood to read the deliciously turned speech that had been written for him, and had flipped the switch on the remote control device in his pocket.
Away in front of them a huge white dome that bulged against the sky cracked down in the middle, split, and slowly folded itself down into the ground. Everyone gasped although they had known perfectly well it was going to do that because they had built it that way.
Beneath it lay uncovered a huge starship, one hundred and fifty metres long, shaped like a sleek running shoe, perfectly white and mindboggingly beautiful. At the heart of it, unseen, lay a small gold box which carried within it the most brain-wretching device ever conceived, a device which made this starship unique in the history of the galaxy, a device after which the ship had been named--The Heart of Gold.
The crowd turned their faces back towards him expectantly. He winked at Trillian who raised her eyebrows and widened her eyes at him. She knew what he was about to say and thought him a terrible showoff.
"That is really amazing," he said. "That really is truly amazing. That is so amazingly amazing I think I'd like to steal it."
A marvellous Presidential quote, absolutely true to form. The crowd laughed appreciatively, the newsmen gleefully punched buttons on their Sub-Etha News-Matics and the President grinned.
As he grinned his heart screamed unbearably and he fingered the small Paralyso-Matic bomb that nestled quietly in his pocket.
Finally he could bear it no more. He lifted his heads up to the sky, let out a wild whoop in major thirds, threw the bomb to the ground and ran forward through the sea of suddenly frozen smiles.
Margaret Hilda Roberts was born on 13 October 1925, in Grantham, Lincolnshire. Her parents were Alfred Roberts (1892–1970), from Northamptonshire, and Beatrice Ethel Stephenson (1888–1960), from Lincolnshire. Her father's maternal grandmother, Catherine Sullivan, was born in County Kerry, Ireland.
Roberts spent her childhood in Grantham, where her father owned a tobacconist's and a grocery shop. In 1938, before the Second World War, the Roberts family briefly gave sanctuary to a teenage Jewish girl who had escaped Nazi Germany. With her pen-friending elder sister Muriel, Margaret saved pocket money to help pay for the teenager's journey.
Alfred was an alderman and a Methodist local preacher. He brought up his daughter as a strict Wesleyan Methodist,[10] attending the Finkin Street Methodist Church, but Margaret was more sceptical; the future scientist told a friend that she could not believe in angels, having calculated that they needed a breastbone six feet long to support wings.
Alfred came from a Liberal family but stood (as was then customary in local government) as an Independent. He served as Mayor of Grantham in 1945–46 and lost his position as alderman in 1952 after the Labour Party won its first majority on Grantham Council in 1950.
Margaret Roberts attended Huntingtower Road Primary School and won a scholarship to Kesteven and Grantham Girls' School, a grammar school. Her school reports showed hard work and continual improvement; her extracurricular activities included the piano, field hockey, poetry recitals, swimming and walking.
She was head girl in 1942–43, and outside school, while the Second World War was ongoing, she voluntarily worked as a fire watcher in the local ARP service. Other students thought of Roberts as the "star scientist", although mistaken advice regarding cleaning ink from parquetry almost caused chlorine gas poisoning.
In her upper sixth year Roberts was accepted for a scholarship to study chemistry at Somerville College, Oxford, a women's college, starting in 1944. After another candidate withdrew, Roberts entered Oxford in October 1943.
Roberts arrived at Oxford in 1943 and graduated in 1947 with a second-class degree in chemistry, after specialising in X-ray crystallography under the supervision of Dorothy Hodgkin. Her dissertation was on the structure of the antibiotic gramicidin. She also received the degree of Master of Arts in 1950 (as an Oxford BA, she was entitled to the degree 21 terms after her matriculation).
Roberts did not only study chemistry as she intended to be a chemist only for a short period of time, already thinking about law and politics. She was reportedly prouder of becoming the first prime minister with a science degree than becoming the first female prime minister.
While prime minister she attempted to preserve Somerville as a women's college. Twice a week outside study she worked in a local forces canteen. During her time at Oxford, Roberts was noted for her isolated and serious attitude.
Her first boyfriend, Tony Bray (1926–2014), recalled that she was "very thoughtful and a very good conversationalist. That's probably what interested me. She was good at general subjects". Roberts's enthusiasm for politics as a girl made him think of her as "unusual" and her parents as "slightly austere" and "very proper".
Roberts became President of the Oxford University Conservative Association in 1946. She was influenced at university by political works such as Friedrich Hayek's The Road to Serfdom (1944), which condemned economic intervention by government as a precursor to an authoritarian state.
After graduating, Roberts moved to Colchester in Essex to work as a research chemist for BX Plastics. In 1948 she applied for a job at Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), but was rejected after the personnel department assessed her as "headstrong, obstinate and dangerously self-opinionated". Agar (2011) argues that her understanding of modern scientific research later impacted her views as prime minister.
Roberts joined the local Conservative Association and attended the party conference at Llandudno, Wales, in 1948, as a representative of the University Graduate Conservative Association.
Meanwhile, she became a high-ranking affiliate of the Vermin Club, a group of grassroots Conservatives formed in response to a derogatory comment made by Aneurin Bevan. One of her Oxford friends was also a friend of the Chair of the Dartford Conservative Association in Kent, who were looking for candidates.
Officials of the association were so impressed by her that they asked her to apply, even though she was not on the party's approved list; she was selected in January 1950 (aged 24) and added to the approved list post ante.
At a dinner following her formal adoption as Conservative candidate for Dartford in February 1949 she met divorcé Denis Thatcher, a successful and wealthy businessman, who drove her to her Essex train. After their first meeting she described him to Muriel as "not a very attractive creature – very reserved but quite nice".
In preparation for the election Roberts moved to Dartford, where she supported herself by working as a research chemist for J. Lyons and Co. in Hammersmith, part of a team developing emulsifiers for ice cream. She married at Wesley's Chapel and her children were baptised there, but she and her husband began attending Church of England services and would later convert to Anglicanism.
In the 1950 and 1951 general elections, Roberts was the Conservative candidate for the Labour seat of Dartford. The local party selected her as its candidate because, though not a dynamic public speaker, Roberts was well-prepared and fearless in her answers; prospective candidate Bill Deedes recalled: "Once she opened her mouth, the rest of us began to look rather second-rate."
She attracted media attention as the youngest and the only female candidate. She lost on both occasions to Norman Dodds, but reduced the Labour majority by 6,000, and then a further 1,000. During the campaigns, she was supported by her parents and by future husband Denis Thatcher, whom she married in December 1951.
Denis funded his wife's studies for the bar; she qualified as a barrister in 1953 and specialised in taxation. Later that same year their twins Carol and Mark were born, delivered prematurely by Caesarean section.
In 1954, Thatcher was defeated when she sought selection to be the Conservative Party candidate for the Orpington by-election of January 1955. She chose not to stand as a candidate in the 1955 general election, in later years stating: "I really just felt the twins were only two, I really felt that it was too soon. I couldn't do that."
Afterwards, Thatcher began looking for a Conservative safe seat and was selected as the candidate for Finchley in April 1958 (narrowly beating Ian Montagu Fraser). She was elected as MP for the seat after a hard campaign in the 1959 election.
Benefiting from her fortunate result in a lottery for backbenchers to propose new legislation, Thatcher's maiden speech was, unusually, in support of her private member's bill, the Public Bodies (Admission to Meetings) Act 1960, requiring local authorities to hold their council meetings in public; the bill was successful and became law.
In 1961 she went against the Conservative Party's official position by voting for the restoration of birching as a judicial corporal punishment.
Thatcher's talent and drive caused her to be mentioned as a future prime minister in her early 20s[23] although she herself was more pessimistic, stating as late as 1970: "There will not be a woman prime minister in my lifetime – the male population is too prejudiced."
In October 1961 she was promoted to the frontbench as Parliamentary Undersecretary at the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance by Harold Macmillan. Thatcher was the youngest woman in history to receive such a post, and among the first MPs elected in 1959 to be promoted.
After the Conservatives lost the 1964 election, she became spokeswoman on Housing and Land, in which position she advocated her party's policy of giving tenants the Right to Buy their council houses.
She moved to the Shadow Treasury team in 1966 and, as Treasury spokeswoman, opposed Labour's mandatory price and income controls, arguing they would unintentionally produce effects that would distort the economy.
Jim Prior suggested Thatcher as a Shadow Cabinet member after the Conservatives' 1966 defeat, but party leader Edward Heath and Chief Whip William Whitelaw eventually chose Mervyn Pike as the Conservative Shadow Cabinet's sole woman member.
At the 1966 Conservative Party conference, Thatcher criticised the high-tax policies of the Labour government as being steps "not only towards Socialism, but towards Communism", arguing that lower taxes served as an incentive to hard work.
Thatcher was one of the few Conservative MPs to support Leo Abse's bill to decriminalise male homosexuality. She voted in favour of David Steel's bill to legalise abortion, as well as a ban on hare coursing. She supported the retention of capital punishment[62] and voted against the relaxation of divorce laws.
In 1967, the United States Embassy chose Thatcher to take part in the International Visitor Leadership Program (then called the Foreign Leader Program), a professional exchange programme that allowed her to spend about six weeks visiting various US cities and political figures as well as institutions such as the International Monetary Fund.
Although she was not yet a Shadow Cabinet member, the embassy reportedly described her to the State Department as a possible future prime minister. The description helped Thatcher meet with prominent people during a busy itinerary focused on economic issues, including Paul Samuelson, Walt Rostow, Pierre-Paul Schweitzer and Nelson Rockefeller.
Following the visit, Heath appointed Thatcher to the Shadow Cabinet[56] as Fuel and Power spokeswoman.[65] Before the 1970 general election, she was promoted to Shadow Transport spokeswoman and later to Education.
In 1968, Enoch Powell delivered his "Rivers of Blood" speech in which he strongly criticised Commonwealth immigration to the United Kingdom and the then-proposed Race Relations Bill. When Heath telephoned Thatcher to inform her that he would sack Powell from the Shadow Cabinet, she recalled that she "really thought that it was better to let things cool down for the present rather than heighten the crisis".
She believed that his main points about Commonwealth immigration were correct and that the selected quotations from his speech had been taken out of context. In a 1991 interview for Today, Thatcher stated that she thought Powell had "made a valid argument, if in sometimes regrettable terms".
Around this time, she gave her first Commons speech as a shadow transport minister and highlighted the need for investment in British Rail. She argued: "if we build bigger and better roads, they would soon be saturated with more vehicles and we would be no nearer solving the problem."
Thatcher made her first visit to the Soviet Union in the summer of 1969 as the Opposition Transport spokeswoman, and in October delivered a speech celebrating her ten years in Parliament. In early 1970, she told The Finchley Press that she would like to see a "reversal of the permissive society".
Girls photographed at Baldock County Council School in Hertfordshire enjoy a drink of milk during a break in the school day in 1944. Thatcher abolished free milk for children aged 7–11 (pictured) in 1971 as her predecessor had done for older children in 1968
The Conservative Party, led by Edward Heath, won the 1970 general election, and Thatcher was appointed to the Cabinet as Secretary of State for Education and Science. Thatcher caused controversy when, after only a few days in office, she withdrew Labour's Circular 10/65 which attempted to force comprehensivisation, without going through a consultation process.
She was highly criticised for the speed at which she carried this out. Consequently, she drafted her own new policy, which ensured that local authorities were not forced to go comprehensive. Her new policy was not meant to stop the development of new comprehensives; she said: "We shall expect plans to be based on educational considerations rather than on the comprehensive principle."
Thatcher supported Lord Rothschild's 1971 proposal for market forces to affect government funding of research. Although many scientists opposed the proposal, her research background probably made her sceptical of their claim that outsiders should not interfere with funding.
The department evaluated proposals for more local education authorities to close grammar schools and to adopt comprehensive secondary education. Nevertheless, she managed to save 94 grammar schools.
Although Thatcher was committed to a tiered secondary modern-grammar school system of education and attempted to preserve grammar schools, during her tenure as education secretary she turned down only 326 of 3,612 proposals (roughly 9 per cent) for schools to become comprehensives; the proportion of pupils attending comprehensive schools consequently rose from 32 per cent to 62 per cent.
During her first months in office she attracted public attention due to the government's attempts to cut spending. She gave priority to academic needs in schools, while administering public expenditure cuts on the state education system, resulting in the abolition of free milk for schoolchildren aged seven to eleven.
She held that few children would suffer if schools were charged for milk but agreed to provide younger children with pint daily for nutritional purposes. She also argued that she was simply carrying on with what the Labour government had started since they had stopped giving free milk to secondary schools.
Milk would still be provided to those children that required it on medical grounds, and schools could still sell milk. The aftermath of the milk row hardened her determination; she told the editor-proprietor Harold Creighton of The Spectator: "Don't underestimate me, I saw how they broke Keith [Joseph], but they won't break me."
Cabinet papers later revealed that she opposed the policy but had been forced into it by the Treasury. Her decision provoked a storm of protest from Labour and the press,[80] leading to her being notoriously nicknamed "Margaret Thatcher, Milk Snatcher".
She reportedly considered leaving politics in the aftermath and later wrote in her autobiography: "I learned a valuable lesson [from the experience]. I had incurred the maximum of political odium for the minimum of political benefit."
The Heath government continued to experience difficulties with oil embargoes and union demands for wage increases in 1973, subsequently losing the February 1974 general election.
Labour formed a minority government and went on to win a narrow majority in the October 1974 general election. Heath's leadership of the Conservative Party looked increasingly in doubt. Thatcher was not initially seen as the obvious replacement, but she eventually became the main challenger, promising a fresh start.
Her main support came from the parliamentary 1922 Committee[84] and The Spectator,[85] but Thatcher's time in office gave her the reputation of a pragmatist rather than that of an ideologue. She defeated Heath on the first ballot and he resigned the leadership.
In the second ballot she defeated Whitelaw, Heath's preferred successor. Thatcher's election had a polarising effect on the party; her support was stronger among MPs on the right, and also among those from southern England, and those who had not attended public schools or Oxbridge.
Thatcher became Conservative Party leader and Leader of the Opposition on 11 February 1975; she appointed Whitelaw as her deputy. Heath was never reconciled to Thatcher's leadership of the party.
Television critic Clive James, writing in The Observer prior to her election as Conservative Party leader, compared her voice of 1973 to "a cat sliding down a blackboard". Thatcher had already begun to work on her presentation on the advice of Gordon Reece, a former television producer. By chance, Reece met the actor Laurence Olivier, who arranged lessons with the National Theatre's voice coach.
Thatcher began attending lunches regularly at the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA), a think tank founded by Hayekian poultry magnate Antony Fisher; she had been visiting the IEA and reading its publications since the early 1960s.
There she was influenced by the ideas of Ralph Harris and Arthur Seldon, and became the face of the ideological movement opposing the British welfare state. Keynesian economics, they believed, was weakening Britain. The institute's pamphlets proposed less government, lower taxes, and more freedom for business and consumers.
Thatcher intended to promote neoliberal economic ideas at home and abroad. Despite setting the direction of her foreign policy for a Conservative government, Thatcher was distressed by her repeated failure to shine in the House of Commons.
Consequently, Thatcher decided that as "her voice was carrying little weight at home", she would "be heard in the wider world". Thatcher undertook visits across the Atlantic, establishing an international profile and promoting her economic and foreign policies.
She toured the United States in 1975 and met President Gerald Ford, visiting again in 1977, when she met President Jimmy Carter. Among other foreign trips, she met Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi during a visit to Iran in 1978. Thatcher chose to travel without being accompanied by her shadow foreign secretary, Reginald Maudling, in an attempt to make a bolder personal impact.
In domestic affairs, Thatcher opposed Scottish devolution (home rule) and the creation of a Scottish Assembly. She instructed Conservative MPs to vote against the Scotland and Wales Bill in December 1976, which was successfully defeated, and then when new Bills were proposed she supported amending the legislation to allow the English to vote in the 1979 referendum on Scottish devolution.
Britain's economy during the 1970s was so weak that then Foreign Secretary James Callaghan warned his fellow Labour Cabinet members in 1974 of the possibility of "a breakdown of democracy", telling them: "If I were a young man, I would emigrate."
In mid-1978, the economy began to recover, and opinion polls showed Labour in the lead, with a general election being expected later that year and a Labour win a serious possibility.
Now prime minister, Callaghan surprised many by announcing on 7 September that there would be no general election that year, and he would wait until 1979 before going to the polls. Thatcher reacted to this by branding the Labour government "chickens", and Liberal Party leader David Steel joined in, criticising Labour for "running scared".
The Labour government then faced fresh public unease about the direction of the country and a damaging series of strikes during the winter of 1978–79, dubbed the "Winter of Discontent". The Conservatives attacked the Labour government's unemployment record, using advertising with the slogan "Labour Isn't Working".
A general election was called after the Callaghan ministry lost a motion of no confidence in early 1979. The Conservatives won a 44-seat majority in the House of Commons, and Thatcher became the first female British prime minister.
I stand before you tonight in my Red Star chiffon evening gown, my face softly made up and my fair hair gently waved, the Iron Lady of the Western world. Thatcher embracing her Soviet nickname in 1976
In 1976, Thatcher gave her "Britain Awake" foreign policy speech which lambasted the Soviet Union, saying it was "bent on world dominance". The Soviet Army journal Red Star reported her stance in a piece headlined "Iron Lady Raises Fears", alluding to her remarks on the Iron Curtain.
The Sunday Times covered the Red Star article the next day,[107] and Thatcher embraced the epithet a week later; in a speech to Finchley Conservatives she likened it to the Duke of Wellington's nickname "The Iron Duke".[104] The "Iron" metaphor followed her throughout ever since,[108] and would become a generic sobriquet for other strong-willed female politicians.
Thatcher was Opposition leader and prime minister at a time of increased racial tension in Britain. On the local elections of 1977, The Economist commented: "The Tory tide swamped the smaller parties—specifically the National Front [NF], which suffered a clear decline from last year."
Her standing in the polls had risen by 11% after a 1978 interview for World in Action in which she said "the British character has done so much for democracy, for law and done so much throughout the world that if there is any fear that it might be swamped people are going to react and be rather hostile to those coming in", as well as "in many ways [minorities] add to the richness and variety of this country. The moment the minority threatens to become a big one, people get frightened".
In the 1979 general election, the Conservatives had attracted votes from the NF, whose support almost collapsed. In a July 1979 meeting with Foreign Secretary Lord Carrington and Home Secretary William Whitelaw, Thatcher objected to the number of Asian immigrants, in the context of limiting the total of Vietnamese boat people allowed to settle in the UK to fewer than 10,000 over two years.
One question that continued to fascinate the public about the phenomenon of a woman Prime Minister was how she got on with the Queen. The answer is that their relations were punctiliously correct, but there was little love lost on either side.
As two women of very similar age – Mrs Thatcher was six months older – occupying parallel positions at the top of the social pyramid, one the head of government, the other head of state, they were bound to be in some sense rivals. Mrs Thatcher's attitude to the Queen was ambivalent.
On the one hand she had an almost mystical reverence for the institution of the monarchy. Yet at the same time she was trying to modernise the country and sweep away many of the values and practices which the monarchy perpetuated.
Michael Shea, the Queen's press secretary, in 1986 leaked stories of a deep rift to The Sunday Times. He said that she felt Thatcher's policies were "uncaring, confrontational and socially divisive". Thatcher later wrote: "I always found the Queen's attitude towards the work of the Government absolutely correct stories of clashes between 'two powerful women' were just too good not to make up."
Thatcher's economic policy was influenced by monetarist thinking and economists such as Milton Friedman and Alan Walters. Together with her first chancellor, Geoffrey Howe, she lowered direct taxes on income and increased indirect taxes.
She increased interest rates to slow the growth of the money supply, and thereby lower inflation; introduced cash limits on public spending and reduced expenditure on social services such as education and housing.
Cuts to higher education led to Thatcher being the first Oxford-educated, post-war incumbent without an honorary doctorate from Oxford University, after a 738–319 vote of the governing assembly and a student petition.
Some Heathite Conservatives in the Cabinet, the so-called "wets", expressed doubt over Thatcher's policies. The 1981 England riots resulted in the British media discussing the need for a policy U-turn.
At the 1980 Conservative Party conference, Thatcher addressed the issue directly, with a speech written by the playwright Ronald Millar, that notably included the following lines: To those waiting with bated breath for that favourite media catchphrase, the "U" turn, I have only one thing to say. "You turn if you want to. The lady's not for turning."
Thatcher's job approval rating fell to 23% by December 1980, lower than recorded for any previous prime minister. As the recession of the early 1980s deepened, she increased taxes, despite concerns expressed in a March 1981 statement signed by 364 leading economists
which argued there was "no basis in economic theory for the Government's belief that by deflating demand they will bring inflation permanently under control", adding that "present policies will deepen the depression, erode the industrial base of our economy and threaten its social and political stability".
By 1982, the UK began to experience signs of economic recovery;[133] inflation was down to 8.6% from a high of 18%, but unemployment was over 3 million for the first time since the 1930s.
By 1983, overall economic growth was stronger, and inflation and mortgage rates had fallen to their lowest levels in 13 years, although manufacturing employment as a share of total employment fell to just over 30%, with total unemployment remaining high, peaking at 3.3 million in 1984.
During the 1982 Conservative Party Conference, Thatcher said: "We have done more to roll back the frontiers of socialism than any previous Conservative Government."
She said at the Party Conference the following year that the British people had completely rejected state socialism and understood "the state has no source of money other than money which people earn themselves. There is no such thing as public money; there is only taxpayers' money."
By 1987, unemployment was falling, the economy was stable and strong, and inflation was low. Opinion polls showed a comfortable Conservative lead, and local council election results had also been successful, prompting Thatcher to call a general election for 11 June that year, despite the deadline for an election still being 12 months away. The election saw Thatcher re-elected for a third successive term.
Thatcher had been firmly opposed to British membership of the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM, a precursor to European Economic and Monetary Union), believing that it would constrain the British economy
despite the urging of both Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson and Foreign Secretary Geoffrey Howe; in October 1990 she was persuaded by John Major, Lawson's successor as Chancellor, to join the ERM at what proved to be too high a rate.
Thatcher reformed local government taxes by replacing domestic rates (a tax based on the nominal rental value of a home) with the Community Charge (or poll tax) in which the same amount was charged to each adult resident.
The new tax was introduced in Scotland in 1989 and in England and Wales the following year,[144] and proved to be among the most unpopular policies of her premiership. Public disquiet culminated in a 70,000 to 200,000-strong demonstration in London in March 1990;
the demonstration around Trafalgar Square deteriorated into riots, leaving 113 people injured and 340 under arrest. The Community Charge was abolished in 1991 by her successor, John Major. It has since transpired that Thatcher herself had failed to register for the tax, and was threatened with financial penalties if she did not return her form.
Thatcher believed that the trade unions were harmful to both ordinary trade unionists and the public. She was committed to reducing the power of the unions, whose leadership she accused of undermining parliamentary democracy and economic performance through strike action. Several unions launched strikes in response to legislation introduced to limit their power, but resistance eventually collapsed.
Only 39% of union members voted Labour in the 1983 general election.[151] According to the BBC in 2004, Thatcher "managed to destroy the power of the trade unions for almost a generation". The miners' strike of 1984–85 was the biggest and most devastating confrontation between the unions and the Thatcher government.
In March 1984, the National Coal Board (NCB) proposed to close 20 of the 174 state-owned mines and cut 20,000 jobs out of 187,000. Two-thirds of the country's miners, led by the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) under Arthur Scargill, downed tools in protest.
However, Scargill refused to hold a ballot on the strike, having previously lost three ballots on a national strike (in January and October 1982, and March 1983). This led to the strike being declared illegal by the High Court of Justice.
Thatcher refused to meet the union's demands and compared the miners' dispute to the Falklands War, declaring in a speech in 1984: "We had to fight the enemy without in the Falklands.
We always have to be aware of the enemy within, which is much more difficult to fight and more dangerous to liberty." Thatcher's opponents presented her words as indicating contempt for the working class and have been employed in criticism of her ever since.
After a year out on strike in March 1985, the NUM leadership conceded without a deal. The cost to the economy was estimated to be at least £1.5 billion, and the strike was blamed for much of the pound's fall against the US dollar.
Thatcher reflected on the end of the strike in her statement that "if anyone has won" it was "the miners who stayed at work" and all those "that have kept Britain going".
The government closed 25 unprofitable coal mines in 1985, and by 1992 a total of 97 mines had been closed;[156] those that remained were privatised in 1994. The resulting closure of 150 coal mines, some of which were not losing money, resulted in the loss of tens of thousands of jobs and had the effect of devastating entire communities.
Strikes had helped bring down Heath's government, and Thatcher was determined to succeed where he had failed. Her strategy of preparing fuel stocks, appointing hardliner Ian MacGregor as NCB leader, and ensuring that police were adequately trained and equipped with riot gear contributed to her triumph over the striking miners.
The number of stoppages across the UK peaked at 4,583 in 1979, when more than 29 million working days had been lost. In 1984, the year of the miners' strike, there were 1,221, resulting in the loss of more than 27 million working days.
Stoppages then fell steadily throughout the rest of Thatcher's premiership; in 1990, there were 630 and fewer than 2 million working days lost, and they continued to fall thereafter.
Thatcher's tenure also witnessed a sharp decline in trade union density, with the percentage of workers belonging to a trade union falling from 57.3% in 1979 to 49.5% in 1985. In 1979 up until Thatcher's final year in office, trade union membership also fell, from 13.5 million in 1979 to fewer than 10 million.
The policy of privatisation has been called "a crucial ingredient of Thatcherism".
After the 1983 election the sale of state utilities accelerated; more than £29 billion was raised from the sale of nationalised industries, and another £18 billion from the sale of council houses.
The process of privatisation, especially the preparation of nationalised industries for privatisation, was associated with marked improvements in performance, particularly in terms of labour productivity.
Some of the privatised industries, including gas, water, and electricity, were natural monopolies for which privatisation involved little increase in competition. The privatised industries that demonstrated improvement sometimes did so while still under state ownership. British Steel Corporation had made great gains in profitability while still a nationalised industry under the government-appointed MacGregor chairmanship, which faced down trade-union opposition to close plants and halve the workforce.
Regulation was also significantly expanded to compensate for the loss of direct government control, with the foundation of regulatory bodies such as Oftel (1984), Ofgas (1986), and the National Rivers Authority (1989). There was no clear pattern to the degree of competition, regulation, and performance among the privatised industries.
In most cases, privatisation benefited consumers in terms of lower prices and improved efficiency, but results overall have been mixed. Not all privatised companies have had successful share price trajectories in the longer term.
A 2010 review by the IEA states: "It does seem to be the case that once competition and/or effective regulation was introduced, performance improved markedly. But I hasten to emphasise again that the literature is not unanimous."
Thatcher always resisted privatising British Rail and was said to have told Transport Secretary Nicholas Ridley: "Railway privatisation will be the Waterloo of this government. Please never mention the railways to me again." Shortly before her resignation in 1990, she accepted the arguments for privatisation, which her successor John Major implemented in 1994.
The privatisation of public assets was combined with financial deregulation to fuel economic growth. Chancellor Geoffrey Howe abolished the UK's exchange controls in 1979, which allowed more capital to be invested in foreign markets, and the Big Bang of 1986 removed many restrictions on the London Stock Exchange.
In 1980 and 1981, Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA) and Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) prisoners in Northern Ireland's Maze Prison carried out hunger strikes to regain the status of political prisoners that had been removed in 1976 by the preceding Labour government.
Bobby Sands began the 1981 strike, saying that he would fast until death unless prison inmates won concessions over their living conditions.[ Thatcher refused to countenance a return to political status for the prisoners, having declared "Crime is crime is crime; it is not political"
Nevertheless, the British government privately contacted republican leaders in a bid to bring the hunger strikes to an end. After the deaths of Sands and nine others, the strike ended.
Some rights were restored to paramilitary prisoners, but not official recognition of political status. Violence in Northern Ireland escalated significantly during the hunger strikes.
Thatcher narrowly escaped injury in an IRA assassination attempt at a Brighton hotel early in the morning on 12 October 1984. Five people were killed, including the wife of minister John Wakeham.
Thatcher was staying at the hotel to prepare for the Conservative Party conference, which she insisted should open as scheduled the following day. She delivered her speech as planned, though rewritten from her original draft, in a move that was widely supported across the political spectrum and enhanced her popularity with the public.
On 6 November 1981, Thatcher and Irish Taoiseach Garret FitzGerald had established the Anglo-Irish Inter-Governmental Council, a forum for meetings between the two governments.
On 15 November 1985, Thatcher and FitzGerald signed the Hillsborough Anglo-Irish Agreement, which marked the first time a British government had given the Republic of Ireland an advisory role in the governance of Northern Ireland.
In protest, the Ulster Says No movement led by Ian Paisley attracted 100,000 to a rally in Belfast, Ian Gow, later assassinated by the PIRA, resigned as Minister of State in the HM Treasury, and all 15 Unionist MPs resigned their parliamentary seats; only one was not returned in the subsequent by-elections on 23 January 1986.
Thatcher supported an active climate protection policy; she was instrumental in the passing of the Environmental Protection Act 1990, the founding of the Hadley Centre for Climate Research and Prediction, the establishment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and the ratification of the Montreal Protocol on preserving the ozone.
Thatcher helped to put climate change, acid rain and general pollution in the British mainstream in the late 1980s,[198][200] calling for a global treaty on climate change in 1989.[201] Her speeches included one to the Royal Society in 1988, followed by another to the UN General Assembly in 1989.
Thatcher appointed Lord Carrington, an ennobled member of the party and former Secretary of State for Defence, to run the Foreign Office in 1979. Although considered a "wet", he avoided domestic affairs and got along well with Thatcher.
One issue was what to do with Rhodesia, where the white-minority had determined to rule the prosperous, black-majority breakaway colony in the face of overwhelming international criticism.
With the 1975 Portuguese collapse in the continent, South Africa (which had been Rhodesia's chief supporter) realised that their ally was a liability; black rule was inevitable, and the Thatcher government brokered a peaceful solution to end the Rhodesian Bush War in December 1979 via the Lancaster House Agreement.
The conference at Lancaster was attended by Rhodesian prime minister Ian Smith, as well as by the key black leaders: Muzorewa, Mugabe, Nkomo and Tongogara. The result was the new Zimbabwean nation under black rule in 1980.
Thatcher's first foreign-policy crisis came with the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. She condemned the invasion, said it showed the bankruptcy of a détente policy and helped convince some British athletes to boycott the 1980 Moscow Olympics.
She gave weak support to US president Jimmy Carter who tried to punish the USSR with economic sanctions. Britain's economic situation was precarious, and most of NATO was reluctant to cut trade ties.
Thatcher nevertheless gave the go-ahead for Whitehall to approve MI6 (along with the SAS) to undertake "disruptive action" in Afghanistan. As well working with the CIA in Operation Cyclone, they also supplied weapons, training and intelligence to the mujaheddin.
The Financial Times reported in 2011 that her government had secretly supplied Ba'athist Iraq under Saddam Hussein with "non-lethal" military equipment since 1981.
Having withdrawn formal recognition from the Pol Pot regime in 1979, the Thatcher government backed the Khmer Rouge keeping their UN seat after they were ousted from power in Cambodia by the Cambodian–Vietnamese War.
Although Thatcher denied it at the time,it was revealed in 1991 that, while not directly training any Khmer Rouge, from 1983 the Special Air Service (SAS) was sent to secretly train "the armed forces of the Cambodian non-communist resistance" that remained loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk and his former prime minister Son Sann in the fight against the Vietnamese-backed puppet regime.
Thatcher was one of the first Western leaders to respond warmly to reformist Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. Following Reagan–Gorbachev summit meetings and reforms enacted by Gorbachev in the USSR, she declared in November 1988 that "We're not in a Cold War now", but rather in a "new relationship much wider than the Cold War ever was".
Thatcher and her cabinet meeting with the Reagan cabinet in the White House Cabinet Room. Despite opposite personalities, Thatcher bonded quickly with US president Ronald Reagan.
She gave strong support to the Reagan administration's Cold War policies based on their shared distrust of communism. A sharp disagreement came in 1983 when Reagan did not consult with her on the invasion of Grenada.
During her first year as prime minister she supported NATO's decision to deploy US nuclear cruise and Pershing II missiles in Western Europe, permitting the US to station more than 160 cruise missiles at RAF Greenham Common, starting in November 1983 and triggering mass protests by the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
She bought the Trident nuclear missile submarine system from the US to replace Polaris, tripling the UK's nuclear forces[219] at an eventual cost of more than 12 billion (at 1996–97 prices). Defence Secretary Michael Heseltine, who had supported the Agusta deal, resigned from the government in protest.
Thatcher's preference for defence ties with the US was demonstrated in the Westland affair of 1985–86, when she acted with colleagues to allow the struggling helicopter manufacturer Westland to refuse a takeover offer from the Italian firm Agusta in favour of the management's preferred option, a link with Sikorsky Aircraft.
In April 1986 she permitted US F-111s to use Royal Air Force bases for the bombing of Libya in retaliation for the alleged Libyan bombing of a Berlin discothèque, citing the right of self-defence under Article 51 of the UN Charter. Polls suggested that fewer than one in three British citizens approved of her decision.
Thatcher was in the US on a state visit when Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in August 1990. During her talks with President George H. W. Bush, who succeeded Reagan in 1989, she recommended intervention, and put pressure on Bush to deploy troops in the Middle East to drive the Iraqi Army out of Kuwait.
Bush was apprehensive about the plan, prompting Thatcher to remark to him during a telephone conversation: "This was no time to go wobbly!"[228][229] Thatcher's government supplied military forces to the international coalition in the build-up to the Gulf War, but she had resigned by the time hostilities began on 17 January 1991.
She applauded the coalition victory on the backbenches, while warning that "the victories of peace will take longer than the battles of war". It was disclosed in 2017 that Thatcher had suggested threatening Saddam with chemical weapons after the invasion of Kuwait.
On 2 April 1982, the ruling military junta in Argentina ordered the invasion of the British possessions of the Falkland Islands and South Georgia, triggering the Falklands War. The subsequent crisis was "a defining moment of [Thatcher's] premiership".
At the suggestion of Harold Macmillan and Robert Armstrong,[236] she set up and chaired a small War Cabinet (formally called ODSA, Overseas and Defence committee, South Atlantic) to oversee the conduct of the war, which by 5–6 April had authorised and dispatched a naval task force to retake the islands.
Argentina surrendered on 14 June and Operation Corporate was hailed a success, notwithstanding the deaths of 255 British servicemen and 3 Falkland Islanders. Argentine fatalities totalled 649, half of them after the nuclear-powered submarine HMS Conqueror torpedoed and sank the cruiser ARA General Belgrano on 2 May.
Thatcher was criticised for the neglect of the Falklands' defence that led to the war, and especially by Labour MP Tam Dalyell in Parliament for the decision to torpedo the General Belgrano, but overall she was considered a competent and committed war leader.
The "Falklands factor", an economic recovery beginning early in 1982, and a bitterly divided opposition all contributed to Thatcher's second election victory in 1983.
Thatcher frequently referred after the war to the "Falklands spirit"; Hastings & Jenkins (1983, p. 329) suggests that this reflected her preference for the streamlined decision-making of her War Cabinet over the painstaking deal-making of peacetime cabinet government.
In September 1982 she visited China to discuss with Deng Xiaoping the sovereignty of Hong Kong after 1997. China was the first communist state Thatcher had visited, and she was the first British prime minister to visit China.
Throughout their meeting, she sought the PRC's agreement to a continued British presence in the territory. Deng insisted that the PRC's sovereignty over Hong Kong was non-negotiable but stated his willingness to settle the sovereignty issue with the British government through formal negotiations. Both governments promised to maintain Hong Kong's stability and prosperity.
After the two-year negotiations, Thatcher conceded to the PRC government and signed the Sino-British Joint Declaration in Beijing in 1984, agreeing to hand over Hong Kong's sovereignty in 1997.
Despite saying that she was in favour of "peaceful negotiations" to end apartheid, Thatcher opposed sanctions imposed on South Africa by the Commonwealth and the European Economic Community (EEC).
She attempted to preserve trade with South Africa while persuading its government to abandon apartheid. This included "casting herself as President Botha's candid friend", and inviting him to visit the UK in 1984, in spite of the "inevitable demonstrations" against his government.
Alan Merrydew of the Canadian broadcaster BCTV News asked Thatcher what her response was "to a reported ANC statement that they will target British firms in South Africa?" to which she later replied: "when the ANC says that they will target British companies.
This shows what a typical terrorist organisation it is. I fought terrorism all my life and if more people fought it, and we were all more successful, we should not have it and I hope that everyone in this hall will think it is right to go on fighting terrorism."
During his visit to Britain five months after his release from prison, Nelson Mandela praised Thatcher: "She is an enemy of apartheid, We have much to thank her for."
Thatcher and her party supported British membership of the EEC in the 1975 national referendum and the Single European Act of 1986, and obtained the UK rebate on contributions,but she believed that the role of the organisation should be limited to ensuring free trade and effective competition, and feared that the EEC approach was at odds with her views on smaller government and deregulation.
Believing that the single market would result in political integration, Thatcher's opposition to further European integration became more pronounced during her premiership and particularly after her third government in 1987.
In her Bruges speech in 1988, Thatcher outlined her opposition to proposals from the EEC, forerunner of the European Union, for a federal structure and increased centralisation of decision-making
We have not successfully rolled back the frontiers of the state in Britain, only to see them re-imposed at a European level, with a European super-state exercising a new dominance from Brussels.
Thatcher, sharing the concerns of French president François Mitterrand, was initially opposed to German reunification, telling Gorbachev that it "would lead to a change to postwar borders, and we cannot allow that because such a development would undermine the stability of the whole international situation and could endanger our security".
She expressed concern that a united Germany would align itself more closely with the Soviet Union and move away from NATO.
In March 1990, Thatcher held a Chequers seminar on the subject of German reunification that was attended by members of her cabinet and historians such as Norman Stone, George Urban, Timothy Garton Ash and Gordon A. Craig.
During the seminar, Thatcher described "what Urban called 'saloon bar clichés' about the German character, including 'angst, aggressiveness, assertiveness, bullying, egotism, inferiority complex [and] sentimentality'".
Those present were shocked to hear Thatcher's utterances and "appalled" at how she was "apparently unaware" about the post-war German collective guilt and Germans' attempts to work through their past.
The words of the meeting were leaked by her foreign-policy advisor Charles Powell and, subsequently, her comments were met with fierce backlash and controversy.
During the same month, West German chancellor Helmut Kohl reassured Thatcher that he would keep her "informed of all his intentions about unification", and that he was prepared to disclose "matters which even his cabinet would not know".
During her premiership Thatcher had the second-lowest average approval rating (40%) of any post-war prime minister. Since Nigel Lawson's resignation as Chancellor in October 1989,[262] polls consistently showed that she was less popular than her party.
A self-described conviction politician, Thatcher always insisted that she did not care about her poll ratings and pointed instead to her unbeaten election record.
In December 1989, Thatcher was challenged for the leadership of the Conservative Party by the little-known backbench MP Sir Anthony Meyer.
Of the 374 Conservative MPs eligible to vote, 314 voted for Thatcher and 33 for Meyer. Her supporters in the party viewed the result as a success and rejected suggestions that there was discontent within the party.
Opinion polls in September 1990 reported that Labour had established a 14% lead over the Conservatives, and by November, the Conservatives had been trailing Labour for 18 months. These ratings, together with Thatcher's combative personality and tendency to override collegiate opinion, contributed to further discontent within her party.
In July 1989, Thatcher removed Geoffrey Howe as foreign secretary after he and Lawson had forced her to agree to a plan for Britain to join the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM). Britain joined the ERM in October 1990.
On 1 November 1990, Howe, by then the last remaining member of Thatcher's original 1979 cabinet, resigned from his position as deputy prime minister, ostensibly over her open hostility to moves towards European Monetary Union.
In his resignation speech on 13 November, which was instrumental in Thatcher's downfall, Howe attacked Thatcher's openly dismissive attitude to the government's proposal for a new European currency competing against existing currencies (a "hard ECU"):
How on earth are the Chancellor and the Governor of the Bank of England, commending the hard ECU as they strive to, to be taken as serious participants in the debate against that kind of background noise?
I believe that both the Chancellor and the Governor are cricketing enthusiasts, so I hope that there is no monopoly of cricketing metaphors. It is rather like sending your opening batsmen to the crease only for them to find, the moment the first balls are bowled, that their bats have been broken before the game by the team captain.
On 14 November, Michael Heseltine mounted a challenge for the leadership of the Conservative Party. Opinion polls had indicated that he would give the Conservatives a national lead over Labour.
Although Thatcher led on the first ballot with the votes of 204 Conservative MPs (54.8%) to 152 votes (40.9%) for Heseltine, with 16 abstentions, she was four votes short of the required 15% majority. A second ballot was therefore necessary.
Thatcher initially declared her intention to "fight on and fight to win" the second ballot, but consultation with her cabinet persuaded her to withdraw. After holding an audience with the Queen, calling other world leaders, and making one final Commons speech on 28 November she left Downing Street in tears.
She reportedly regarded her ousting as a betrayal.Her resignation was a shock to many outside Britain, with such foreign observers as Henry Kissinger and Gorbachev expressing private consternation.
Thatcher was replaced as head of government and party leader by Chancellor John Major, whose lead over Heseltine in the second ballot was sufficient for Heseltine to drop out.
Major oversaw an upturn in Conservative support in the 17 months leading to the 1992 general election, and led the party to a fourth successive victory on 9 April 1992. Thatcher had lobbied for Major in the leadership contest against Heseltine, but her support for him waned in later years.
Thatcher returned to the backbenches as a constituency parliamentarian after leaving the premiership. Her domestic approval rating recovered after her resignation, though public opinion remained divided on whether her government had been good for the country.
Aged 66, she retired from the House of Commons at the 1992 general election, saying that leaving the Commons would allow her more freedom to speak her mind.
On leaving the Commons, Thatcher became the first former British prime minister to set up a foundation; the British wing of the Margaret Thatcher Foundation was dissolved in 2005 due to financial difficulties.
She wrote two volumes of memoirs, The Downing Street Years (1993) and The Path to Power (1995). In 1991, she and her husband Denis moved to a house in Chester Square, a residential garden square in central London's Belgravia district.
Thatcher was hired by the tobacco company Philip Morris as a "geopolitical consultant" in July 1992, for $250,000 per year and an annual contribution of $250,000 to her foundation.[288] Thatcher earned $50,000 for each speech she delivered.
Thatcher became an advocate of Croatian and Slovenian independence. Commenting on the Yugoslav Wars, in a 1991 interview for Croatian Radiotelevision, she was critical of Western governments for not recognising the breakaway republics of Croatia and Slovenia as independent and for not supplying them with arms after the Serbian-led Yugoslav Army attacked.
In August 1992 she called for NATO to stop the Serbian assault on Goražde and Sarajevo, to end ethnic cleansing during the Bosnian War, comparing the situation in Bosnia–Herzegovina to "the barbarities of Hitler's and Stalin's".
She made a series of speeches in the Lords criticising the Maastricht Treaty,[284] describing it as "a treaty too far" and stated: "I could never have signed this treaty." She cited A. V. Dicey when arguing that, as all three main parties were in favour of the treaty, the people should have their say in a referendum.
Thatcher served as honorary chancellor of the College of William & Mary in Virginia from 1993 to 2000 while also serving as chancellor of the private University of Buckingham from 1992 to 1998, a university she had formally opened in 1976 as the former education secretary.
After Tony Blair's election as Labour Party leader in 1994, Thatcher praised Blair as "probably the most formidable Labour leader since Hugh Gaitskell", adding: "I see a lot of socialism behind their front bench, but not in Mr Blair.
I think he genuinely has moved." Blair responded in kind: "She was a thoroughly determined person, and that is an admirable quality."
In 1998, Thatcher called for the release of former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet when Spain had him arrested and sought to try him for human rights violations.
She cited the help he gave Britain during the Falklands War. In 1999, she visited him while he was under house arrest near London. Pinochet was released in March 2000 on medical grounds by Home Secretary Jack Straw.
At the 2001 general election, Thatcher supported the Conservative campaign, as she had done in 1992 and 1997, and in the Conservative leadership election following its defeat, she endorsed Iain Duncan Smith over Kenneth Clarke.
In 2002 she encouraged George W. Bush to aggressively tackle the "unfinished business" of Iraq under Saddam Hussein, and praised Blair for his "strong, bold leadership" in standing with Bush in the Iraq War.
She broached the same subject in her Statecraft: Strategies for a Changing World, which was published in April 2002 and dedicated to Ronald Reagan, writing that there would be no peace in the Middle East until Saddam was toppled.
Her book also said that Israel must trade land for peace and that the European Union (EU) was a "fundamentally unreformable", "classic utopian project, a monument to the vanity of intellectuals, a programme whose inevitable destiny is failure". She argued that Britain should renegotiate its terms of membership or else leave the EU and join the North American Free Trade Area.
Following several small strokes she was advised by her doctors not to engage in further public speaking. In March 2002 she announced that, on doctors' advice, she would cancel all planned speaking engagements and accept no more.
Being Prime Minister is a lonely job. In a sense, it ought to be: you cannot lead from the crowd. But with Denis there I was never alone. What a man. What a husband. What a friend. On 11 June 2004, Thatcher (against doctor's orders) attended the state funeral service for Ronald Reagan.
She delivered her eulogy via videotape; in view of her health, the message had been pre-recorded several months earlier. Thatcher flew to California with the Reagan entourage, and attended the memorial service and interment ceremony for the president at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library.
In 2005, Thatcher criticised how Blair had decided to invade Iraq two years previously. Although she still supported the intervention to topple Saddam Hussein, she said that (as a scientist) she would always look for "facts, evidence and proof" before committing the armed forces.
She celebrated her 80th birthday on 13 October at the Mandarin Oriental Hotel in Hyde Park, London; guests included the Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh, Princess Alexandra and Tony Blair.
Geoffrey Howe, Baron Howe of Aberavon, was also in attendance and said of his former leader: "Her real triumph was to have transformed not just one party but two, so that when Labour did eventually return, the great bulk of Thatcherism was accepted as irreversible."
In 2006, Thatcher attended the official Washington, D.C. memorial service to commemorate the fifth anniversary of the 11 September attacks on the US. She was a guest of vice-president Dick Cheney and met secretary of state Condoleezza Rice during her visit.
In February 2007 Thatcher became the first living British prime minister to be honoured with a statue in the Houses of Parliament. The bronze statue stood opposite that of her political hero, Winston Churchill, and was unveiled on 21 February 2007 with Thatcher in attendance; she remarked in the Members' Lobby of the Commons: "I might have preferred iron – but bronze will do It won't rust."
Thatcher was a public supporter of the Prague Declaration on European Conscience and Communism and the resulting Prague Process, and sent a public letter of support to its preceding conference.
After collapsing at a House of Lords dinner, Thatcher, suffering low blood pressure,[321] was admitted to St Thomas' Hospital in central London on 7 March 2008 for tests. In 2009 she was hospitalised again when she fell and broke her arm.
Thatcher returned to 10 Downing Street in late November 2009 for the unveiling of an official portrait by artist Richard Stone, an unusual honour for a living former prime minister. Stone was previously commissioned to paint portraits of the Queen and Queen Mother.
On 4 July 2011, Thatcher was to attend a ceremony for the unveiling of a 10 ft (3.0 m) statue to Ronald Reagan, outside the US Embassy in London, but was unable to attend due to her frail health.
She last attended a sitting of the House of Lords on 19 July 2010, and on 30 July 2011 it was announced that her office in the Lords had been closed. Earlier that month, Thatcher was named the most competent prime minister of the past 30 years in an Ipsos MORI poll.
Thatcher's daughter Carol first revealed that her mother had dementia in 2005, saying "Mum doesn't read much any more because of her memory loss". In her 2008 memoir, Carol wrote that her mother "could hardly remember the beginning of a sentence by the time she got to the end".
She later recounted how she was first struck by her mother's dementia when, in conversation, Thatcher confused the Falklands and Yugoslav conflicts; she recalled the pain of needing to tell her mother repeatedly that her husband Denis was dead.
Baroness Thatcher died on 8 April 2013, at the age of 87, after suffering a stroke. She had been staying at a suite in the Ritz Hotel in London since December 2012 after having difficulty with stairs at her Chester Square home in Belgravia.
Her death certificate listed the primary causes of death as a "cerebrovascular accident" and "repeated transient ischaemic attack"; secondary causes were listed as a "carcinoma of the bladder" and dementia.
Reactions to the news of Thatcher's death were mixed across the UK, ranging from tributes lauding her as Britain's greatest-ever peacetime prime minister to public celebrations of her death and expressions of hatred and personalised vitriol.
Details of Thatcher's funeral had been agreed with her in advance. She received a ceremonial funeral, including full military honours, with a church service at St Paul's Cathedral on 17 April.
Queen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh attended her funeral, marking only the second time in the Queen's reign that she attended the funeral of any of her former prime ministers, after that of Winston Churchill, who received a state funeral in 1965.
After the service at St Paul's, Thatcher's body was cremated at Mortlake Crematorium, where her husband had been cremated. On 28 September, a service for Thatcher was held in the All Saints Chapel of the Royal Hospital Chelsea's Margaret Thatcher Infirmary. In a private ceremony, Thatcher's ashes were interred in the hospital's grounds, next to her husband's.
She promised in 1982 that the highly popular National Health Service was "safe in our hands". At first, she ignored the question of privatising nationalised industries; heavily influenced by right-wing think tanks, and especially by Sir Keith Joseph, Thatcher broadened her attack.
Thatcherism came to refer to her policies as well as aspects of her ethical outlook and personal style, including moral absolutism, nationalism, liberal individualism, and an uncompromising approach to achieving political goals.
Thatcher defined her own political philosophy, in a major and controversial break with the one-nation conservatism[344] of her predecessor Edward Heath, in a 1987 interview published in Woman's Own magazine
The number of adults owning shares rose from 7 per cent to 25 per cent during her tenure, and more than a million families bought their council houses, giving an increase from 55 per cent to 67 per cent in owner-occupiers from 1979 to 1990.
The houses were sold at a discount of 33–55 per cent, leading to large profits for some new owners. Personal wealth rose by 80 per cent in real terms during the 1980s, mainly due to rising house prices and increased earnings. Shares in the privatised utilities were sold below their market value to ensure quick and wide sales, rather than maximise national income.
The "Thatcher years" were also marked by periods of high unemployment and social unrest, and many critics on the left of the political spectrum fault her economic policies for the unemployment level; many of the areas affected by mass unemployment as well as her monetarist economic policies remained blighted for decades, by such social problems as drug abuse and family breakdown.
Unemployment did not fall below its May 1979 level during her tenure, only marginally falling below its April 1979 level in 1990. The long-term effects of her policies on manufacturing remain contentious.
Speaking in Scotland in 2009, Thatcher insisted she had no regrets and was right to introduce the poll tax and withdraw subsidies from "outdated industries, whose markets were in terminal decline", subsidies that created "the culture of dependency, which had done such damage to Britain".
Political economist Susan Strange termed the neoliberal financial growth model "casino capitalism", reflecting her view that speculation and financial trading were becoming more important to the economy than industry.
Critics on the left describe her as divisive and say she condoned greed and selfishness.[348] Leading Welsh politician Rhodri Morgan, among others, characterised Thatcher as a "Marmite" figure. Journalist Michael White, writing in the aftermath of the 2007–08 financial crisis, challenged the view that her reforms were still a net benefit.
Thatcher's stance on immigration in the late 1970s was perceived as part of a rising racist public discourse, which Barker (1981) terms "new racism". In opposition, Thatcher believed that the National Front (NF) was winning over large numbers of Conservative voters with warnings against floods of immigrants.
Her strategy was to undermine the NF narrative by acknowledging that many of their voters had serious concerns in need of addressing. In 1978 she criticised Labour's immigration policy to attract voters away from the NF to the Conservatives.
Her rhetoric was followed by an increase in Conservative support at the expense of the NF. Critics on the left accused her of pandering to racism.
Many Thatcherite policies had an influence on the Labour Party, which returned to power in 1997 under Tony Blair. Blair rebranded the party "New Labour" in 1994 with the aim of increasing its appeal beyond its traditional supporters, and to attract those who had supported Thatcher, such as the "Essex man".
Thatcher is said to have regarded the "New Labour" rebranding as her greatest achievement. In contrast to Blair, the Conservative Party leader at the time William Hague attempted to distance himself and the party from Thatcher's economic policies in an attempt to gain public approval.
Shortly after Thatcher's death in 2013, Scottish first minister Alex Salmond argued that her policies had the "unintended consequence" of encouraging Scottish devolution. Lord Foulkes of Cumnock agreed on Scotland Tonight that she had provided "the impetus" for devolution.
Writing for The Scotsman in 1997, Thatcher argued against devolution on the basis that it would eventually lead to Scottish independence.
Thatcher ranked highest among living persons in the 2002 BBC poll 100 Greatest Britons. In 1999, Time deemed Thatcher one of the 100 most important people of the 20th century.
In 2015 she topped a poll by Scottish Widows, a major financial services company, as the most influential woman of the past 200 years; and in 2016 topped BBC Radio 4's Woman's Hour Power List of women judged to have had the biggest impact on female lives over the past 70 years.
In 2020, Time magazine included Thatcher's name on its list of 100 Women of the Year. She was chosen as the Woman of the Year 1982, the year in which the Falklands War began under her command and resulted in the British victory.
In contrast to her relatively poor average approval rating as prime minister, Thatcher has since ranked highly in retrospective opinion polling and, according to YouGov, she is "seen in overall positive terms" by the British public.[394] She was voted the fourth-greatest British prime minister of the 20th century in a poll of 139 academics organised by MORI.
In the Falklands, Margaret Thatcher Day has been marked each 10 January since 1992, commemorating her first visit to the Islands in January 1983, six months after the end of the Falklands War in June 1982.
Thatcher became a member of the House of Lords in 1992 with a life peerage as Baroness Thatcher, of Kesteven in the County of Lincolnshire.
Subsequently, the College of Arms granted her usage of a personal coat of arms; she was allowed to revise these arms on her appointment as Lady of the Order of the Garter (LG) in 1995, the highest order of chivalry for women.
"Ever been to Peppa Pig World?” the prime minister asked the bemused delegates at the CBI conference. Not many had, it seems, not least because of the Covid-19 lockdowns over the past 20 months or so, the imposition of which not being aided by Boris Johnson’s disastrous prevarications and confusions.
It was a low point, but perhaps a mercy to the assembled business folk that he got the pages of his speech mixed up, and stopped jabbering. At least the silence was comprehensible, punctuated only by some utterances of “forgive me”.
Despite a vague commitment to “levelling up” as a “moral mission”, Mr Johnson was wise to avoid any reference at all to the government’s latest evolution of its social care policy. Which could easily be labelled it’s social “don’t care” policy.
It is effectively a tax policy reversed and turned upside down. It is eye wateringly, heartrendingly unfair. Rather than richer people (and their descendants) paying proportionately more for their care in old age or disability, or even the same as poorer families, it means that they will pay proportionally less.
In its way, it is quite an achievement for an administration to come up with such a regressive policy and yet market it as a fair and equitable package of reforms. Flawed as it was before, it is now unacceptable.
Fans rushed security barriers and charged their way into a concert at London’s O2 Arena on Sunday night, in scenes less than a month after the deadly Astroworld crowd crush in the United States. Mostly young fans were at the former Millennium Dome to see Wizkid, the Nigerian singer and songwriter, as part of his Made In Lagos tour.
The “No Stress” hitmaker is playing three nights at the North Greenwich venue. According to the venue website, the first two dates were sold out and the third was added at a later stage “due to demand”.
In videos shared on social media, a crowd can be seen surging through the main security checkpoint as workers attempt to stop them. At one point, a metal-detecting arch gives way to the crush and topples over. In another video, a woman appears to push a venue security worker after he grabs another member of the public.
“Suddenly we had several people down on the ground, experiencing some type of cardiac arrest or some type of medical episode,” Mr Satterwhite told the Associated Press. And so we immediately started doing CPR, and moving people right then, and that’s when I went and met with the promoters, and Live Nation, and they agreed to end early in the interest of public safety.”
Speaking to CNN, Bernon Blount said that his grandson, Ezra Blount, had gone to the concert to see “his favorite artist” and was with his father, Treston Blount. Mr Blount said: “When my son went to the concert, he had my grandson on his shoulder.”
He added: “All the people pushed in and he could not breathe so he ended up passing out because of all the pressure that was being applied to his body. And when he passed out, Ezra fell off his shoulder and fell into the crowd.”
Friends and relatives of victims posted tributes online while a memorial sprung up in Houston and Travis Scott pledged to cooperate with authorities and help families who’d lost loved ones. Who are the victims?
The youngest victim has been identified as nine-year-old Ezra Blount, who was on life support following the tragic concert. Another young victim was John Hilgert, 14, a high school freshman and athlete. The boy’s school district, located west of Houston, released a statement confirming his death.
It said: “Our hearts go out to the student’s family and to his friends and our staff at Memorial. This is a terrible loss, and the entire MHS family is grieving today. Please keep the student’s family in your thoughts and prayers as they face this tragedy. We will make counselors available to students next week to offer any help and support needed.”
Another young student to perish at the concert chaos was 16-year-old Brianna Rodriguez, according to ABC13, who reported that the high school junior had a passion for dance. Ms Rodriguez’s sister shared an emotional tribute on Facebook, writing: “Dancing was her passion and now she’s dancing her way to heaven’s pearly gates.”
The oldest victim was identified as Danish Baig. The man’s younger brother, Basil Mirza Baig, told The Houston Chronicle that his sibling had died in an ambulance after being crushed while trying to save his sister-in-law.
Another victim, Rodolfo Angel Peña, 23, died of cardiac arrest at the concert, according to USA Today. Mr Peña was a student and aspiring model who intended to become a border patrol agent one day, according to the newspaper.
His sister, Jennifer, called him “the sweetest person, friendly, outgoing.” “He had many friends because he was always there for everyone,” she told the Laredo Morning Times, adding that he “was a big fan of Travis. He loved his music.”
Relatives were first notified simply that her brother had been hurt, she said - and it wasn’t until hours later, when her mother arrived in Houston, that they found out he had been killed.
Franco Patino, a 21-year-old college student originally from Naperville, Illinois, also died at the Texas concert, according to the student newspaper of the University of Dayton, where he was a student. He was attending the show to celebrate the birthday of his best friend, Jacob Jurinek - whose family on Sunday confirmed he had also been killed.
Mr Patino was a mechanical engineering technology major with a minor in human movement biomechanics, in addition to being a member of a Latino fraternity at the school, which confirmed his passing.
Mr Patino and Mr Jurinek were both graduates of Neaqua High School in Naperville, which is a western suburb of Chicago. Mr Jurinek was a junior at Southern Illinois University Carbondale and described himself on his LinkedIn profile as “a creative mind with a knack for graphic design. A photoshop expert in the making, with a lot of hands on experience for someone still in college.
A student studying to earn a journalism degree with a specialization in advertisement at Southern Illinois University. Also a student intern with SIU’s athletic media team, helping to design graphics for digital and print media, and manage social media accounts for all sports at the university.”
He added that he hoped to “take my talents to the next level, and one day create graphics for a professional sports team.” Mr Jurinek’s devastated family confirmed his death alongside his friend Mr Patino.
“Jake was beloved by his family and by his seemingly countless number of friends for his contagious enthusiasm, his boundless energy, and his unwavering positive attitude,” they said.
“He was an avid fan of music, an artist, a son, a best friend to many, and a loving and beloved cousin, nephew, and grandson. Always deeply committed to his family, he was affectionately known as ‘Big Jake’ by his adoring younger cousins, a name befitting of his larger-than-life personality.”
“We are all devastated and are left with a huge hole in our lives,” said his father, Ron Jurinek, according to ABC7 Chicago. “Right now, we ask for the time and space for our family to process this tragic news and begin to heal. We’re comforted by the fact that the hundreds of people Jake touched over the years will carry a piece of his spirit with them.”
What authorities are saying. At least two investigations, one criminal, are underway following Friday night’s tragedy.
Investigators are expected to examine the design of safety barriers and the area around the stage and the use of crowd control in determining what led to the crush of spectators at the music festival.City officials said they were in the early stages of investigating what caused the pandemonium.
Steven Adelman, vice president of the industry group Event Safety Alliance, which was formed after the collapse of a stage at the Indiana State Fair in 2011 killed seven people, helped write industry guidelines widely used today.
Besides looking at safety barriers and whether they correctly directed crowds or contributed to the crush of spectators, Mr Adelman said, authorities will look at whether something incited the crowd besides Scott taking the stage.
Mr Adelman said another question is whether there was enough security there, noting there is a nationwide shortage of people willing to take low-wage, part-time security gigs.Houston police and fire department officials said their investigation would include reviewing video taken by concert promoter Live Nation, as well as dozens of clips from people at the show.
Officials also planned to review the event’s security plan and various permits issued to organisers to see whether they were properly followed. In addition, investigators planned to speak with Live Nation representatives, Scott and concertgoers.
Houston Fire Chief Samuel Peña and other officials held a sombre news conference in the early hours of Saturday.“The crowd began to compress towards the front of the stage, and that caused some panic, and it started causing some injuries,” he said. “People began to fall out, become unconscious, and it created additional panic.”
Officials transported 17 people to hospitals, including 11 who were in cardiac arrest. Many people were also treated at the scene at a field hospital that had been set up. About 300 people were examined at that site throughout the day, he said.
A reunification centre was set up at a Houston hotel for family members who had not been able to reach festivalgoers. Authorities were looking to connect families with festivalgoers who were transported to the hospital, “some as young as 10” years old, said Harris County Judge Lina Hidalgo, calling the incident an “extremely tragic night.”
“Our hearts are broken,” she said. “People go to these events looking for a good time. It’s not the kind of event where you expect to find out about fatalities.”
Investigators are looking into “what caused, one, the issue of the crowd surge, and two, what prevented people from being able to escape that situation,” according to Mr Peña.
Houston Police Department Chief Troy Finner said he was “sending investigators to the hospitals because we just don’t know.
“We’re going to do an investigation and find out, because it’s not fair to producers, to anybody else involved, until we determine what happened, what caused the surge,” he told The New York Times.
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner said on Saturday following the concert tragedy that “nothing is off the table, in terms of persons who were there, people who may have fainted ... it is way too preliminary now to draw any conclusions.”
The mayor released all permits relating to the festival on Tuesday, “in the interest of transparency and amid great public interest.” “I continue to pray for the families of those who have died, and on behalf of the City, I send my best wishes to those who are recovering,” Mayor Turner said.
Both Travis Scott and Houston authorities have extended their condolences to the families of the victims - with HPD Chief Finner urging the rapper’s fans - who tend to be young: “Kids and young individuals that were out there: If you saw something, say something.
“This is now a criminal investigation that’s going to involve our homicide division as well as narcotics,” Chief Finner said. “And we’re going to get down to the bottom of it.”
Houston authorities on Saturday urged the public to come forward with information and not to buy into theories spreading on social media - while reiterating that they were ruling out nothing as they proceed with their investigation.
“One of the narratives was some individual was injecting other individuals with drugs,” Chief Finner said Saturday at a news conference. “We do have a report from a security officer ... that he was reaching over the restrain or grab a citizen and he felt a prick in his neck.”
According to Chief Finner, that officer fell unconscious and was revived with Narcan, which is administered to counteract opioid overdoses.
Houston Fire Chief Samuel Pena said he could not provide an exact number of Narcan administrations but there were “several” or “many where they did administer Narcan on scene.”
On Tuesday Chief Pena said his agency would fully cooperate with the Houston Police Department’s investigation into the Astroworld tragedy because the families of the victims deserve answers.
“We will be cooperating fully in terms of our resources and what we did in that operation, everything will be turned over to Houston Police Department so they can conduct a fair, thorough investigation,” Chief Pena told CNN.
The Houston firefighters union has now complained that its members were not in radio contact with private medical providers hired by the event organisers and had only been provided with mobile phone numbers.
According to the Saturday press conference, more than 520 HPD officers were working at the concert, augmented by 755 private security provided by Live Nation. The venue for the festival - which was started by rapper and Houston native Mr Scott - had experienced crowd control issues previously, but authorities insisted any missteps in the past had been corrected.
HPD Chief Finner said Live Nation was handing over footage later on Saturday to aid in the investigation.
Security apparently identified issues around 9.30pm on Friday and called for the event to be shut down, with nearly everyone removed from the venue by 10.10pm
“When you have a group that that’s young ... I think that part was pretty good,” Chief Finner said Saturday. Contemporary Services Corp., headquartered in Los Angeles, was responsible for security staff at the festival, according to county records in Texas, AP reported.
Representatives for the company — which advertises online as being “recognized worldwide as the pioneer, expert and only employee owned company in the crowd management field” — did not immediately respond to emails and phone messages seeking comment.
The FBI has also reportedly joined the criminal investigation into the concert tragedy. On Tuesday, it emerged that Astroworld Festival staff were instructed to refer to dead concertgoers as ‘Smurfs’ in the event of a fatality, according to a leaked safety and emergency response plan.
The 55-page document, obtained by CNN, informs staff how to respond to robberies, active shooters, terror threats and other emergencies. What is a crowd surge?
This tragic type of event is not uncommon, calling to mind everything from the 1989 Hillsborough disaster – which left 97 people dead after a football match in Sheffield, England – to the 2003 Rhode Island nightclub fire in West Warwick, Rhode Island, that killed 100 people and injured 230.
“At occupancies of about 7 persons per square meter the crowd becomes almost a fluid mass,” John Fruin, a retired research engineer with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, wrote in a 1993 paper, The Causes and Prevention of Crowd Disasters.
“Shock waves can be propagated through the mass sufficient to lift people off of their feet and propel them distances of 3 m (10 ft) or more. People may be literally lifted out of their shoes, and have clothing torn off. Intense crowd pressures, exacerbated by anxiety, make it difficult to breathe.”
Conservative MP Sir Geoffrey Cox has broken his silence over revelations he had a lucrative second job working for tax havens in the Caribbean, saying that he was “pursuing an honourable profession”. The former attorney general had been advising the British Virgin Islands government – via London-based law firm Withers LLP – during an inquiry into allegations of state corruption.
He was paid more than £54,000 for legal work in October, according to the most recent update of the parliamentary register of interests. This most recent declaration brings his total legal earnings this year to almost £955,000, on top of his MP’s salary of £81,932.
Sir Geoffrey has been referred to Westminster’s rules watchdog after allegations he used his parliamentary office while advising the government of the Caribbean islands. The revelations came as a number of Conservative MPs were accused of having inappropriate second jobs including working as lobbyists.
Sir Geoffrey told ITV News:: “All I’ve been doing is pursuing an honourable profession and looking after my constituency." Asked if he was guilty of sleaze, the MP for Torridge and West Devon said: “No, of course not.”
He added: “I'm doing in Parliament exactly what John Smith did, what Bob Marshall-Andrews did, what Alex Carlisle did, what dozens of very distinguished Labour and Liberal Democrat and Conservative MPs have done for generations in parliament, which is to practise the law.”
Sir Geoffrey defended his outside interests by arguing that “it is up to the electors of Torridge and West Devon whether or not they vote for someone who is a senior and distinguished professional in his field and who still practices that profession”.
He was asked to advise the BVI government and has described his role at the hearings as being “to assist the public inquiry in getting to the truth”. Sir Geoffrey also insisted that his constituents get his “full commitment at all times”.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson has faced increasing pressure to take action amid the escalating sleaze scandal engulfing his party. Earlier this month, in a bid to reassure the public, he had said that MPs who break the rules “should be punished”.
Deputy Labour leader Angela Rayner said the sleaze scandal is a “test of leadership” for the PM. She also said: “Geoffrey Cox is taking the mick and the prime minister is letting him get away with it.”
The public has been told to expect “a great Christmas” without new Covid restrictions, despite the arrival of the omicron variant and fears that vaccines will be less effective against it.
A day after the return of compulsory mask-wearing was announced, along with more costly tests for travellers, Sajid Javid sought to reassure people that the moves could be lifted soon – and that harsher curbs were not on the way.
He continued: “I’ve been voted in many times and I look forward to abiding by the judgement of the electorate next time.” The health secretary insisted it was not necessary to bring back social distancing or a work-from-home rule, saying: “We are not there yet – we are nowhere near that.”
Mr Javid expressed hope that the reintroduction in England of face-coverings in shops and on public transport, together with PCR tests for arrivals, would be reversed “within weeks”. They will come into force early on Tuesday.
And he told an interviewer: “I think people should continue with their plans as normal for Christmas; I think it’s going to be a great Christmas,” while offering no “guarantees”.
In a further boost, the doctor who discovered the omicron variant said she thought the UK was “panicking unnecessarily”, and that the new variant did not, to her knowledge, appear to make people seriously ill.
Dr Angelique Coetzee, chair of the South African Medical Association, said: “What we are seeing clinically in south Africa, and remember I’m at the epicentre – that’s where I’m practising – it’s extremely mild.”
The health secretary’s comments came as the UK recorded another 51 deaths and 37,681 new Covid cases in just 24 hours, and in spite of the detection of a third omicron infection, in a person with links to travel in southern Africa, who visited London before leaving the country again.
Dr Jenny Harries, head of the UK Health Security Agency, said it was “very likely” that further cases of the variant would be discovered in the UK in the coming days.
The booster programme will be speeded up, to deliver third jabs to over-18s “earlier” than planned, in an effort to raise “the antibody level in the whole of the community”. The deputy chair of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), Professor Anthony Harnden, called it a “sensible strategy” after the body was asked to explore the move.
The JCVI will also review whether second doses should be offered to 12- to 15-year-olds, and whether the six-month gap between second and booster jabs should be cut.
In further developments: * Mr Javid admitted that air passengers from South Africa were not tested on arrival on Friday, despite fears they could be carrying the omicron variant * New guidance for schools said that secondary students must wear masks in communal areas and on school buses
* Gordon Brown warned that next year’s Christmas is at risk from Covid restrictions unless the UK and other rich nations stop hoarding vaccines badly needed in Africa* Mr Javid was forced to defend not adopting a work-from-home rule – despite the Sage advisory group concluding it to be the most effective Covid-curbing measure
* The health secretary said the advice would be updated if omicron symptoms were confirmed to be different, causing extreme fatigue but no loss of taste or smell * New coronavirus regulations will be laid in parliament on Monday, but a vote will not be held until up to 28 days later – long after the measures take effect
Early evidence suggests omicron may be more transmissible than the delta variant, the current dominant strain, and that it may partially evade the protection delivered by current vaccines. The contacts of omicron cases will be told to isolate for 10 days, until any greater danger from its mutations is established by scientists.
Ruling out further curbs for now, Mr Javid told Sky News: “We know now that those type of measures do carry a very heavy price, both economically, socially, and in terms of non-Covid health outcomes, such as the impact on mental health.
“If one was to make decisions like that, they would have to be done very, very carefully. We’re not there yet. We’re nowhere near that.” And speaking on the BBC, he said people would not be advised to work from home, adding: “I don’t think that’s necessary.”
Sometime toward the end of the twentieth century I dimly recall in the culture and among the people I knew a generationally ambient feeling that marriage was no longer an important theme or plot point in storytelling—and this included the story of one’s own life.
Marriage was a trap into which one should not be irrationally enticed, and from which one would want ultimately to escape, a diminished sideshow and distraction from life’s main projects of personal autonomy, meaningful work, self-actualization, political activism, and noble causes generally.
Or so went the conversation. Tinged with patriarchic taint, marriage was not the mutual journey and social necessity it had been promoted as, and for women in particular this became a feminist idea.
A bride who took her husband’s surname was not forming a team or partnership but taking the “slave name,” and in so doing was acknowledging the vexed nature of the institution while still participating in it. The erosion of one’s own personality was inevitable and could lead only to bitterness.
The stigma of divorce seemingly gone and its traumas under-advertised, whether marriage happened or not, succeeded or not, was not a priority for my immediate peer group. Weddings were infrequent, and if you cried while attending one, the tears were a surprise, and their meaning was unclear.
But marriage remains one of the biggest structural and emotional decisions one makes in life. It determines so much of one’s future (and precipitates a conversation with one’s past), no matter how casually one enters into it.
I remind my students of this—especially when we are discussing whether the literary concerns of Jane Austen, Henry James, and Edith Wharton are outmoded—and the students from South Asian and African countries have sometimes appeared to understand this best, with respect and trepidation.
Marriage has much to do with community and family, things that in this country keep collapsing and then getting rebuilt in new and often inventive ways. Being in an American marriage can feel simultaneously dangerous to the self and societally protective of the individual, in the ways that activists for gay marriage have enumerated over the years (taxes, health care, housing).
The business of couples therapy, taken up by shamans, clergy, MSWs, psychologists, and psychiatrists with both medical and analytic training, shines a spotlight on the difficulties of marital arrangements when the two people begin to awaken from initial romance, flex, and stretch apart: someone has changed who wasn’t supposed to; someone hasn’t changed who was expected to.
The desire for personal growth plus affectionate companionship, sexual appreciation, and spiritual renewal are all placed within a fragile marital arrangement originally designed for the management of property and offspring.
Of course, money and children are often the main issues in marital discord and are thus prominent topics in couples therapy. As is communication: one person has usually persuaded their more reluctant partner to embark on this verbal project.
A third party is needed to referee and interpret. More speech, however exhausting, is required, if not necessarily desired, by everyone. Human language was invented only 70,000 years ago—it sometimes just feels longer than that.
That these therapeutic sessions are also often theatrical—that is, the marriage is performed for an audience, its problems enacted for a critic in that audience—has not gone unnoticed by the theatrical world. (Most recently, Jeremy O. Harris’s Slave Play used psychodramatic couples therapy as its structure.)
And now television, in a strange but elegantly edited reality show on Showtime, a “docu-series” titled Couples Therapy, has also gotten into the business of turning our intimate lives, with their negotiations and compromises, into theater. The series offers up some real-life New York City couples who have agreed to do their therapy in front of a camera.
Perhaps some of them are would-be actors: many are charismatic and unafraid, as if auditioning for agents. All are articulate and a little sad. Occasionally there is reassuring laughter, which is the sound of hope. There is no story arc, but there is growing comfort and optimism as the series proceeds to the finale of each season.
That the history of our species came in stages was an idea that came in stages. Aristotle saw the formation of political entities as a tripartite process: first we had families; next we had the villages into which they banded; and finally, in the coalescence of those villages, we got a governed society, the polis.
Natural law theorists later offered fable-like notions of how politics arose from the state of nature, culminating in Thomas Hobbes’s mid-seventeenth-century account of how the sovereign rescued prepolitical man from a ceaseless war of all against all.
But it was Jean-Jacques Rousseau, a hundred years later, who popularized the idea that we could peer at our prehistory and discern developmental stages marked by shifts in technology and social arrangements.
In his Discourse on the Origin and the Foundation of Inequality (1755), humans went from being solitary brutes to companionable, egalitarian hunter-gatherers; but with the rise of metallurgy and agriculture, things had taken a dire turn: people were civilized, and humanity was ruined.
Once you found yourself cultivating a piece of land, ownership emerged: the field you toiled over was yours. Private property led to capital accumulation, disparities of wealth, violence, subjugation, slavery.
In short order, political societies “multiplied and spread over the face of the earth,” Rousseau wrote, “till hardly a corner of the world was left in which a man could escape the yoke.”
Even people who rejected his politics were captivated by his origin story. In the nineteenth century, greater empirical rigor was brought to the conjectural history that Rousseau had unfolded.
A Danish archaeologist partitioned prehistory into the Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages; a British one split the Stone Age into the Paleolithic and the Neolithic. For the emerging discipline of anthropology, the crucial stages were set out in Ancient Society (1877) by the American ethnologist Lewis Henry Morgan.
Human beings, he concluded, had emerged from a hunter-gathering phase of “savagery” to a sedentary “barbarian” era of agriculture, marked by the domestication of cereal grains and livestock. Technologies of agriculture advanced, writing arose, governed towns and cities coalesced, and civilization established itself. Morgan’s model of social evolution, presaged by Rousseau, became the common understanding of how political society came about.
Then came another important stage in the story of stages. In the 1930s, the Australian archaeologist V. Gordon Childe synthesized the anthropological and archaeological findings of his predecessors: after a Paleolithic era of hunting and gathering in small bands
Neolithic revolution saw the rise of agriculture (again, mainly harvesting cereals and herding ruminants), a soaring population, sedentism, and finally what he called the “urban revolution,” distinguished by large, dense settlements, administrative complexity, public works, hierarchy, systems of writing, and states.
This basic story of social evolution has been refined and revised by later scholarship. (One recent point of emphasis is that grain, being storable and hard to hide, lent itself to taxation.) But it’s mainly taken to be—as we like to say these days—directionally correct. There was a stepwise connection, we think, between sowing cereals in our primeval past and waiting in line at the Department of Motor Vehicles.
The Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity, by the anthropologist David Graeber and the archaeologist David Wengrow, assails the proposition that there’s some cereals-to-states arrow of history. A mode of production, they insist, doesn’t come with a predetermined politics.
Societies of hunter-gatherers could be miserably hierarchical; some indigenous American groups, fattened on foraging and fishing, had vainglorious aristocrats, patronage relationships, and slavery.
Agriculturalist communities could be marvelously democratic. Societies could have big public works without farming. And cities—this is a critical point for Graeber and Wengrow—could function perfectly well without bosses and administrators.
In Steffani Jemison’s split-screen video In Succession (2019)—the most recent, longest, and largest work in the multimedia artist’s first show at Greene Naftali in Chelsea—four Black men (it took me a long time to decide there were four)
all dressed more or less identically in starched white button-down shirts, khaki pants, and black sneakers, are engaged in a mysterious choreographed activity on the lawn of a large white house (we often see shots of cornices and gables; we often see shots of the grass from above).
The motion of the video is gently slowed. The tightness of the framing and the juxtaposition of different perspectives on the divided screen mean we never see the whole bodies of individual men, let alone the structure they are collectively forming as they move through the frame. It’s impossible to tell whose limbs or torso belongs to whom, an effect heightened by the sameness of the clothing.
That they are involved in some kind of collaborative, careful gymnastic activity is clear: you can see hands supporting ankles, feet resting on backs or shoulders, legs extended into the air.
At moments you can also just hear—over what sounds like wind and traffic, noises that may or may not be diegetic and often serve to amplify a general sense of silence—the men indicating how to support or position one another’s bodies: “That’s it,” “Shoulders,” “Over here.”
The video’s drama of lightness and weight is subtly echoed in the presentation of the video in the gallery; instead of projecting it onto the wall, Jemison constructed a large screen, sixteen by nineteen feet, that rests on the floor.
Watching In Succession (2019), I find it hard to identify when a body is horizontal or vertical, when a body is supporting or supported, where the force of gravity is being resisted and how. It becomes fascinatingly difficult to sort relaxation from strain, a difficulty compounded by the shots of the men’s faces when they appear
they often have their eyes shut; they could be at rest or intensely focused on holding their position. Images of the grass or house or a tree in the yard or the sky that might be from the perspective of the men themselves—someone facing up or down while holding a pose—also prevent any clear orientation to the horizon, to direction or downward force.
I’m using words like “confusing” and “difficult,” but the video isn’t headache-inducing; it’s beautiful, balletic, hypnotic, moving. (This quality is what first attracted me to Jemison’s work.
After I saw her video Personal at the Brooklyn Museum in 2014, I wrote to her about the piece; we’ve often been in conversation since.) The grace of the editing of In Succession (2019), the strange mix of gentleness and strength in the men’s quiet collective effort
the gradations of light and dark in the shifting folds of the clothing, the wind in the grass and the leaves, the slowed motion—the piece is, among other things, a study of the effort involved in the appearance of effortlessness, which is one definition of discipline, for an artist or athlete or acrobat.
And yet there is also an unmistakable sense of peril. What is the relation of these four young Black men—who are dressed more or less uniformly, more or less in uniforms—to the large white house? Do they live here? Do they work here? Is what they’re doing work?
The plainness of the clothing, the black-and-white tonality, the details of the house’s architectural ornamentation—all of this renders the historical moment indefinite. The men’s shoes and hairstyles and tattoos seem contemporary, but long stretches of the video could depict any number of pasts, with their different relations of servitude and bondage.
Acollection of makeshift warehouses sits along the highway in Ghout al-Shaal, a worn neighborhood of auto-repair shops and scrap yards in Tripoli, the capital of Libya. Formerly a storage depot for cement, the site was reopened in January, 2021, its outer walls heightened and topped with barbed wire.
Men in black-and-blue camouflage uniforms, armed with Kalashnikov rifles, stand guard around a blue shipping container that passes for an office. On the gate, a sign reads “Directorate for Combatting Illegal Migration.” The facility is a secretive prison for migrants. Its name, in Arabic, is Al Mabani—The Buildings.
At 3 a.m. on February 5, 2021, Aliou Candé, a sturdy, shy twenty-eight-year-old migrant from Guinea-Bissau, arrived at the prison. He had left home a year and a half earlier, because his family’s farm was failing, and had set out to join two brothers in Europe.
But, as he attempted to cross the Mediterranean Sea on a rubber dinghy, with more than a hundred other migrants, the Libyan Coast Guard intercepted them and took them to Al Mabani. They were pushed inside Cell No. 4, where some two hundred others were being held.
There was hardly anywhere to sit in the crush of bodies, and those on the floor slid over to avoid being trampled. Overhead were fluorescent lights that stayed on all night. A small grille in the door, about a foot wide, was the only source of natural light.
Birds nested in the rafters, their feathers and droppings falling from above. On the walls, migrants had scrawled notes of determination: “A soldier never retreats,” and “With our eyes closed, we advance.” Candé crowded into a far corner and began to panic. “What should we do?” he asked a cellmate.
No one in the world beyond Al Mabani’s walls knew that Candé had been captured. He hadn’t been charged with a crime or allowed to speak to a lawyer, and he was given no indication of how long he’d be detained.
In his first days there, he kept mostly to himself, submitting to the grim routines of the place. The prison is controlled by a militia that euphemistically calls itself the Public Security Agency, and its gunmen patrolled the hallways.
About fifteen hundred migrants were held there, in eight cells, segregated by gender. There was only one toilet for every hundred people, and Candé often had to urinate in a water bottle or defecate in the shower. Migrants slept on thin floor pads; there weren’t enough to go around, so people took turns—one lay down during the day, the other at night.
Detainees fought over who got to sleep in the shower, which had better ventilation. Twice a day, they were marched, single file, into the courtyard, where they were forbidden to look up at the sky or talk. Guards, like zookeepers, put communal bowls of food on the ground, and migrants gathered in circles to eat.
The guards struck prisoners who disobeyed orders with whatever was handy: a shovel, a hose, a cable, a tree branch. “They would beat anyone for no reason at all,” Tokam Martin Luther, an older Cameroonian man who slept on a mat next to Candé’s, told me.
Detainees speculated that, when someone died, the body was dumped behind one of the compound’s outer walls, near a pile of brick and plaster rubble. The guards offered migrants their freedom for a fee of twenty-five hundred Libyan dinars—about five hundred dollars.
During meals, the guards walked around with cell phones, allowing detainees to call relatives who could pay. But Candé’s family couldn’t afford such a ransom. Luther told me, “If you don’t have anybody to call, you just sit down.”
In the past six years, the European Union, weary of the financial and political costs of receiving migrants from sub-Saharan Africa, has created a shadow immigration system that stops them before they reach Europe.
It has equipped and trained the Libyan Coast Guard, a quasi-military organization linked to militias in the country, to patrol the Mediterranean, sabotaging humanitarian rescue operations and capturing migrants. The migrants are then detained indefinitely in a network of profit-making prisons run by the militias.
In September of this year, around six thousand migrants were being held, many of them in Al Mabani. International aid agencies have documented an array of abuses: detainees tortured with electric shocks, children raped by guards, families extorted for ransom, men and women sold into forced labor.
“The E.U. did something they carefully considered and planned for many years,” Salah Marghani, Libya’s Minister of Justice from 2012 to 2014, told me. “Create a hellhole in Libya, with the idea of deterring people from heading to Europe.”
Three weeks after Candé arrived at Al Mabani, a group of detainees devised an escape plan. Moussa Karouma, a migrant from Ivory Coast, and several others defecated into a waste bin and left it in their cell for two days, until the stench became overpowering. “It was my first time in prison,”
Karouma told me. “I was terrified.” When guards opened the cell door, nineteen migrants burst past them. They climbed on top of a bathroom roof, dropped fifteen feet over an outer wall, and disappeared into a warren of alleys near the prison.
For those who remained, the consequences were bloody. The guards called in reinforcements, who sprayed bullets into the cells, then beat the inmates. “There was one guy in my ward that they beat with a gun on his head, until he fainted and started shaking,” a migrant later told Amnesty International. “They didn’t call an ambulance to come get him that night.
In the weeks that followed, Candé tried to stay out of trouble and clung to a hopeful rumor: the guards planned to release the migrants in his cell in honor of Ramadan, two months away. “The lord is miraculous,” Luther wrote in a journal he kept. “May his grace continue to protect all migrants around the world and especially those in Libya.”
What came to be called the migrant crisis began around 2010, when people fleeing violence, poverty, and the effects of climate change in the Middle East and sub-Saharan Africa started flooding into Europe.
The World Bank predicts that, in the next fifty years, droughts, crop failures, rising seas, and desertification will displace a hundred and fifty million more people, mostly from the Global South, accelerating migration to Europe and elsewhere.
In 2015 alone, a million people came to Europe from the Middle East and Africa. A popular route went through Libya, then across the Mediterranean Sea to Italy—a distance of less than two hundred miles.
Europe had long pressed Libya to help curb such migration. Muammar Qaddafi, Libya’s leader, had once embraced Pan-Africanism and encouraged sub-Saharan Africans to serve in the country’s oil fields.
But in 2008 he signed a “friendship treaty” with Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian Prime Minister, that committed him to implementing strict controls. Qaddafi sometimes used this as a bargaining chip: he threatened, in 2010, that if the E.U. did not send him more than six billion dollars a year in aid money he would “turn Europe Black.”
In 2011, Qaddafi was toppled and killed in an insurrection sparked by the Arab Spring and supported by a U.S.-led invasion. Afterward, Libya descended into chaos. Today, two governments compete for legitimacy: the U.N.-recognized Government of National Unity, and an administration based in Tobruk and backed by Russia and the self-proclaimed Libyan National Army.
Both rely on shifting, cynical alliances with armed militias that have tribal allegiances and control large portions of the country. Libya’s remote beaches, increasingly unpoliced, have been swamped with migrants headed for Europe.
One of the first major tragedies of the migrant crisis occurred in 2013, when a dinghy carrying more than five hundred migrants, most of them Eritrean, caught fire and sank in the Mediterranean, killing three hundred and sixty people.
They were less than half a mile from Lampedusa, Italy’s southernmost island. At first, European leaders responded with compassion. “We can do this!” Angela Merkel, Germany’s Chancellor, said, promising a permissive approach to immigration.
In early 2014, Matteo Renzi, at thirty-nine, was elected Prime Minister of Italy, the youngest in its history. A telegenic centrist liberal in the model of Bill Clinton, Renzi was predicted to dominate the country’s politics for the next decade.
Like Merkel, he welcomed migrants, saying that, if Europe was willing to turn its back on “dead bodies in the sea,” it could not call itself “civilized.” He supported an ambitious search-and-rescue program called Operation Mare Nostrum, or Our Sea, which insured the safe passage of some hundred and fifty thousand migrants, and Italy provided legal assistance for asylum claims.
As the number of migrants rose, European ambivalence turned to recalcitrance. Migrants needed medical care, jobs, and schooling, which strained resources. James F. Hollifield, a migration expert at the French Institutes for Advanced Studies, told me, “We in the liberal West are in a conundrum.
We have to find a way to secure borders and manage migration without undermining the social contract and the liberal state itself.” Nationalist parties such as the Alternative for Germany and France’s National Rally exploited the situation, fostering xenophobia.
In 2015, men from North Africa sexually assaulted women in Cologne, Germany, fuelling alarm; the next year, an asylum seeker from Tunisia drove a truck into a Christmas market in Berlin, killing twelve. Merkel, under pressure, eventually insisted that migrants assimilate and supported a ban on burqas.
“We need to free ourselves from a sense of guilt,” Matteo Renzi said. “We do not have the moral duty to welcome to Italy people who are worse off than ourselves.”
Renzi’s Mare Nostrum program had cost a hundred and fifteen million euros, and Italy, which was struggling to stave off its third recession in six years, could not sustain the undertaking. Efforts in Italy and Greece to relocate migrants floundered.
Poland and Hungary, both run by far-right leaders, accepted no migrants at all. Officials in Austria talked of building a wall on its Italian border. Italy’s hard-right politicians mocked and denounced Renzi, and their poll numbers skyrocketed.
In December, 2016, Renzi resigned, and his party eventually rolled back his policies. He, too, retreated from his initial generosity. “We need to free ourselves from a sense of guilt,” he said. “We do not have the moral duty to welcome to Italy people who are worse off than ourselves.”
During the next several years, Europe embarked on a different approach, led by Marco Minniti, who became Italy’s Minister of the Interior in 2016. Minniti, a onetime ally of Renzi’s, was frank about his colleague’s miscalculation.
“We did not respond to two feelings that were very strong,” he said. “Anger and fear.” Italy stopped conducting search-and-rescue operations beyond thirty miles from its shores.
Italy, Greece, Spain, and Malta began turning away humanitarian boats carrying rescued migrants, and Italy even charged the captains of such boats with aiding human trafficking. Minniti soon became known as the “Minister of Fear.”
In 2015, the E.U. created the Emergency Trust Fund for Africa, which has since spent nearly six billion dollars. Proponents argue that the program offers aid money to developing countries, paying for covid-19 relief in Sudan and green-energy job training in Ghana.
But much of its work involves pressuring African nations to adopt tougher immigration restrictions and funding the agencies that enforce them. In 2018, officials in Niger allegedly sent “shopping lists” requesting gifts of cars, planes, and helicopters in exchange for their help in pushing anti-immigrant policies.
The program has also supported repressive state agencies, by financing the creation of an intelligence center for Sudan’s secret police, and by allowing the E.U. to give the personal data of Ethiopian nationals to their country’s intelligence service.
The money is doled out at the discretion of the E.U.’s executive branch, the European Commission, and not subject to scrutiny by its Parliament. (A spokesperson for the Trust Fund told me, “Our programs are intended to save lives, protect those in need, and fight trafficking in human beings and migrant smuggling.”)
Minniti looked to Libya—by then a failed state—to become Europe’s primary partner in stopping the flow of migrants. In 2017, he travelled to Tripoli and struck deals with the government recognized in the country at the time and with the most powerful militias.
Italy, backed by E.U. funds, signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Libya, affirming “the resolute determination to coöperate in identifying urgent solutions to the issue of clandestine migrants crossing Libya to reach Europe by sea.”
The Trust Fund has directed half a billion dollars to Libya’s assault on migration. Marghani, the former justice minister, told me that the goal of the program is clear: “Make Libya the bad guy. Make Libya the disguise for their policies while the good humans of Europe say they are offering money to help make this hellish system safer.”
Minniti has said that the European fear of unchecked migration is a “legitimate feeling—one democracy needs to listen to.” His policies have resulted in a stark drop in migrants. In the first half of this year, fewer than twenty-one thousand people made it to Europe by crossing the Mediterranean.
Minniti told the press in 2017, “What Italy did in Libya is a model to deal with migrant flows without erecting borders or barbed wire barriers.” (Minniti has since left government and now heads the Med-Or Foundation, an organization founded by an Italian defense contractor; he did not respond to requests for comment for this piece.)
Italy’s right wing, which helped unseat Renzi, applauded Minniti’s work. “When we proposed such measures, we were labelled as racist,” Matteo Salvini, then the leader of Italy’s Northern League, a nationalist party, said. “Now, finally, everyone seems to understand we were right.”
This past May, I travelled to Tripoli to investigate the system of migrant detention. I had recently started a nonprofit called the Outlaw Ocean Project, which reports on human-rights and environmental issues at sea, and I brought along a three-person research team.
In Tripoli, the coastline was dotted with half-built offices, hotels, apartment buildings, and schools. Armed men in fatigues stood at every intersection. Almost no Western journalists are permitted to enter Libya, but, with the help of an international aid group, we were granted visas.
Shortly after we arrived, I gave my team tracking devices and encouraged them to put photocopies of their passports inside their shoes. We were placed in a hotel near the city center and assigned a small security detail.
The Libyan Coast Guard’s name makes it sound like an official military organization, but it has no unified command; it is made up of local patrols that the U.N. has accused of having links to militias. (Humanitarian workers call it the “so-called Libyan Coast Guard.”)
Minniti told the press, in 2017, that building up the patrols would be a difficult undertaking: “When we said we had to relaunch the Libyan Coast Guard, it seemed like a daydream.” The E.U.’s Trust Fund has since spent tens of millions of dollars to turn the Coast Guard into a formidable proxy force.
In 2018, the Italian government, with the E.U.’s blessing, helped the Coast Guard get approval from the U.N. to extend its jurisdiction nearly a hundred miles off Libya’s coast—far into international waters, and more than halfway to Italian shores.
The E.U. supplied six speedboats, thirty Toyota Land Cruisers, radios, satellite phones, inflatable dinghies, and five hundred uniforms. It spent close to a million dollars last year to build command centers for the Coast Guard, and provides training to officers.
In a ceremony in October, 2020, E.U. officials and Libyan commanders unveiled two state-of-the-art cutters that had been built in Italy and upgraded with Trust Fund money. “The refitting of these two vessels has been a prime example of the constructive coöperation between the European Union; an E.U. member state, Italy; and Libya,” Jose Sabadell, the E.U.’s Ambassador to Libya, said in a press release.
Perhaps the most valuable help comes from the E.U.’s border agency, Frontex, founded in 2004, partly to guard Europe’s border with Russia. In 2015, Frontex began spearheading what it called a “systematic effort to capture” migrants crossing the sea.
Today, it has a budget of more than half a billion euros and its own uniformed service, which it can deploy in operations beyond the E.U.’s borders. The agency maintains a near-constant surveillance of the Mediterranean through drones and privately chartered aircraft.
When it detects a migrant boat, it sends photographs and location information to local government agencies and other partners in the region—ostensibly to assist with rescues—but does not typically inform humanitarian vessels. A spokesperson for Frontex told me that the agency “has never engaged in any direct cooperation with Libyan authorities.”
But an investigation by a coalition of European news organizations, including Lighthouse Reports, Der Spiegel, Libération, and A.R.D., documented twenty instances in which, after Frontex surveilled migrants, their boats were intercepted by the Coast Guard. The investigation also found evidence that Frontex sometimes sends the locations of the migrant boats directly to the Coast Guard.
In a WhatsApp exchange earlier this year, for example, a Frontex official wrote to someone identifying himself as a “captain” in the Libyan Coast Guard, saying, “Good morning sir. We have a boat adrift [coördinates]. People poring water. Please acknowledge this message.” Legal experts argue that these actions violate international laws against refoulement, or the return of migrants to unsafe places.
Frontex officials recently sent me the results of an open-records request I made, which indicate that from February 1st to February 5th, around the time that Candé was at sea, the agency exchanged thirty-seven e-mails with the Coast Guard. (Frontex refused to release the content of the e-mails, saying that it would “put the lives of migrants in danger.”)
A senior official at Frontex, who requested anonymity out of fear of retaliation, told me that the agency also streams its surveillance footage to the Italian Coast Guard and Italy’s Maritime Rescue Coördination Center, which, the official believes, notify the Libyan Coast Guard. (The Italian agencies did not respond to requests for comment.)
The official argued that this indirect method didn’t insulate the agency from responsibility: “You provide that information. You don’t implement the action, but it is the information that provokes the refoulement.”
The official had repeatedly urged superiors to stop any activity that could result in migrants being returned to Libya. “It didn’t matter what you told them,” the official said. “They were not willing to understand.” (A Frontex spokesperson told me, “In any potential search and rescue, the priority for Frontex is to save lives.”)
As the plane dipped below the clouds, an endless patchwork quilt of green fields and russet hedges stretched out beneath me. It had been two years since I had seen that familiar vista, thanks to COVID-19.
However, with travel restrictions lifted — and my arm triple-jabbed — I was finally returning from expat life in Canada to my home country of the United Kingdom, to spend three months with family.
Perhaps it is because it has been so long since my last visit, but the contrasts between North America and this gray, quirky little island seem more pronounced than ever. Everything is so much smaller, the tendencies for reservation and self-deprecation so much clearer, and even more cups of tea are offered (I clutch one as I write).
I live in British Columbia — a British colony back in the days of Queen Victoria, with her government’s dubious penchant for claiming large chunks of the world. Yet, despite these origins, the differences between this Canadian province and the British Isles are as vast as the murky ocean separating them.
Perhaps this island’s very particular culture comes from the hodgepodge of its ancestry: From the Romans to the Vikings, people always loved a good ol’ invasion of this land.
Or maybe it’s simply the sense of history: Everywhere I turn there seems to be an ancient stone church, sitting awkwardly among new neighbors —  swanky bars and flats. Nip to a pub and there will be a plaque above your head, casually informing you that people have been getting drunk in that establishment since 1552.
Whatever the reason, Great Britain is an obscure place — and one that has inspired some interesting writing — with people grappling to understand the different elements that make up the rather bizarre whole. And so, whilst I am embracing stoicism, marmite, rain, and real ales, I decided it was time for the Great British Reading List.
However, her understanding of the two cultures by far transcends my own. In this essay, Penny observes the Great British myth cheerfully portrayed abroad, full of “Queens, detectives, spies, castles, and young wizards,” versus the reality of a little island, “whose power on the world stage is declining, where poverty, inequality, and disaster nationalism are rising.”
The imaginary version, although “fascinatingly dishonest,” is a hypnotic one, and people around the world cozy up with a cup of tea to watch the reassuringly gentle Downton Abbey, or “The Great British Worried-People-Making-Cakes-in-a-Tent Show.”
Penny carefully picks apart why Brits are happy to let this grand deception continue. From the loss of the Empire to the reality of life in Britain under COVID-19 lockdowns, Brexit, and Boris Johnson, we prefer the fantasy version. Have a read — her take on this phenomenon is jolly good.
I do try to resist the temptation to make fun of other people who take uncomplicated joy in their thing. The British do this a lot, and it’s one of the least edifying parts of the national character. Fandom is fine. Escapism is allowed. No semi-sensitive soul can be expected to live in the real world at all times.
But watching the whitewashed, revisionist history of your own country adopted as someone else’s fantasy of choice is actively uncomfortable. It’s like sitting by while a decrepit relative gibbers some antediluvian nonsense about the good old days and watching in horror as everyone applauds and says how charming.
During my first week back in the U.K. I went to the great British seaside. It was beautiful. It was also freezing. Nevertheless, families were picnicking on the beach, sitting in their North Face jackets under huge umbrellas, stoically munching on cheese and pickle sandwiches while the wind beat a dance on their striped windbreakers.
We were one of them. And as the wind turned up a notch into gale force, blowing the ice cream off my Mr. Whippy cone, I recalled Monica Heisey’s article for The Guardian detailing a holiday she went on with three Brits.
As a Canadian, this was her first experience of a British holiday, and I very much enjoyed her shock at the pragmatism involved in holidaying “in a country where the ground is soggy and the sky grey at least 60% of the year.”
On Heisey’s holiday they “went on long, aimless walks every single day,” from “a half-hour jaunt on a public footpath across a gated, excrement-riddled field” to “an off-piste ramble through the tall, dry grasses surrounding a stately home.”
This is completely normal. My family had begun muttering about “lovely coastal walks” months before we left for our seaside break, and sure enough every day we donned knee-high wellies and marched off to check on what those wind levels were up to on more exposed coastal paths.
(On a couple of occasions treating ourselves to a cup of tea halfway round the trudge.) Heisey nails her critique of British culture, and I found myself chuckling more than once reading this article. So take a look, and remember to always just carry on, “the forecast of heavy thunderstorms be damned.”
I am, it seems, comfortably in the minority. After the Great Walking Holiday of 2020, I encountered pro-walking sentiment everywhere. Friends tracked steps with competitive rigor, fighting to be the first to reach 10k a day, or announcing grand Sunday schemes to cross London on foot.
Planning a weekend in Herefordshire, I was inundated with recommendations for the county’s excellent walks. In fact, Airbnb reviews in the UK tend to focus on two things: whether or not the property provides an adequate electric kettle, and the quality and abundance of nearby walking routes.
Recently, watching The Crown on Netflix, I had the disorienting and novel experience of feeling sympathy for Margaret Thatcher who, in an episode set at Balmoral, is dragged out on the royal family’s favourite pastime, “walking around in terrible weather wearing the thickest socks imaginable”.
Great Britain is not particularly renowned for splendid cuisine, but there are some classics: the full English breakfast, a roast dinner, a ploughman’s lunch, bangers and mash, a jar of Branston pickle and marmalade. Full disclosure: I have picked this essay before, for Longreads Best of 2020: Food.
However, I still love it, and last week it came to mind when I had the pleasure of going to a shop that was purely dedicated to the wonder of marmalade: Rows upon rows of glinting orange and yellow jars, winking promises of citrus delights at me. Olivia Potts’ piece, all about this condiment of squashed oranges and sugar, is magical — and very British.
Only in English does marmalade “connote a citrus-based preserve containing peel,” and Potts takes a deep dive into “why the British love marmalade so much.” The result is a lovely piece full of warmth, humor … and the rather wonderful characters who frequent the World’s Original Marmalade Awards.
I stand back and admire my five-and-a-half jars and… I get it. Of course I do. How could I not? My jelly isn’t quite crystal clear, but it is basketball orange, bright and glowing. I dropped saffron strands into a couple of the jars, stirring last minute, and they hang, suspended in the jelly, perfect threads. It may not be award-winning, but it is the best I have ever made. It really does feel like I’ve potted sunshine, a moment in time.
Great Britain may be the home of quaint villages with marmalade shops, but you are also never too far away from a cosmopolitan city. London is a little world all of its own — encircled by the M25, a road known to crush even the most buoyant of souls with its traffic — it is a heady mix of every culture and nationality.
There are nine million people squashed into its bustling streets, or rammed into metal tubes down below: Where underground trains rumble through old Victorian tunnels and people remain ever so careful to mind the gap. Michele Kirsch’s article details an engrossing cross-section of this society.
As a cleaner, Kirsch has a key into the lives of everyone from students to jazz singers, and though it might look like cleaning, exploring people’s homes “feels a bit Miss Marple-ish.” Her eloquent writing evokes the chaos, loneliness, sadness, and joy of the people to whom she is “East London’s good wife.”
Kirsch’s musings also brought back memories of my own time living in London, from Shoreditch being the “unofficial home of the high-maintenance beard,” to the darker side — the casual racism that can sadly still prevail in a multicultural country.
Kirsch notes it when a friend’s 9-year-old son asks her what she does, and to her response that she cleans houses, “he said, ‘I thought you had to be Eastern European to do that. No offense.’” So take a read for a glimpse into London life — the unique viewpoint and beautiful prose of this essay are worth spending some time with.
As well as working for long-term clients, I do one-off jobs, often frantic pleas to clean up before a move, or before the tidy person gets home. One was a flat off Brick Lane. This was a biohazard job: matted, badly stained carpets, never-been-cleaned fridge and cooker, loo out of Trainspotting.
But the guy himself was ebullient, friends with all the neighbours. He just exuded a joie de vivre and genuinely did not see or care that he had been living in a shithole for years. Facing a big, brown dubious stain on his carpet, I asked, “Is this poo, vomit, or curry?” “Possibly all three,” he said, honestly, gleefully. A life well lived. Messily, but happily.
Sadly, the racism touched upon in Kirsch’s essay came crashing to the fore in 2016. I was living in Canada during Brexit, and, absorbed in the echo chamber of friends and family, I considered the referendum on whether Britain should leave the European Union a mere political blip.
As Zadie Smith writes in her incredibly astute and of-the-moment piece, Nigel Farage, one of the main forces behind the Leave campaign, “seemed in the grip of a genuine racial obsession, combined with a determination to fence off Britain from the European mainstream.” It didn’t seem possible to me that this was a sentiment that could win the day. I was wrong.
In truth, the reasons behind Brexit are varied, but the process of the vote did peel back a thin veneer to reveal an ugliness beneath. The week before the referendum, Smith’s Jamaican-born mother had someone run up to her in London and shout “Uber Alles Deutschland!”
The day after the vote, Smith noted “a lady shopping for linens and towels on the Kilburn High Road stood near my mother and the half-dozen other people originally from other places and announced to no one in particular: ‘Well, you’ll all have to go home now!’”
It was not only racial divides that were uncovered: Britain has long been a society dominated by class, with nuanced differences between many invisible, but powerful, lines. From the working class to the neoliberal middle and upper-middle class — reveal where you shop, go to school, or who you socialize with and you can be exposed.
In this essay, Smith recognizes both her own middle-class liberal attitude, and the understanding of other viewpoints that this can preclude her from. Read this essay and understand that the power of this referendum was to magnify “the worst aspects of an already imperfect system—democracy—channeling a dazzlingly wide variety of issues through a very narrow gate.”
Wealthy London, whether red or blue, has always been able to pick and choose the nature of its multicultural and cross-class relations, to lecture the rest of the country on its narrow-mindedness while simultaneously fencing off its own discreet advantages.
We may walk past “them” very often in the street and get into their cabs and eat their food in their ethnic restaurants, but the truth is that more often than not they are not in our schools, or in our social circles, and they very rarely enter our houses—unless they’ve come to work on our endlessly remodeled kitchens.
Britain is a nation of animal lovers: It was the first country in the world to start a welfare charity for animals, and almost one in two households has a pet — 20 million of them being cats and dogs. In the area I am in at the moment it seems this 20 million quota has been filled just with cockapoo dogs named Barney (yes, we have one too).
Fifteen percent of Brits even say they love their pet more than they love their partner (a statistic I am not shocked by after my mother informed me she wished to be buried with the cremated remains of her pet duck).
Therefore, it is also of no surprise that Phil Hoad’s fascinating article delving into the world of two pet detectives searching for a cat murderer is set in Britain. In this country, such things as a memorial service for the cat victims, complete with a harpist and a rendition of “All Things Bright and Beautiful,” are acceptable — people understand the passion of the detectives, Tony Jenkins and Boudicca Rising.
Their organization, SNARL, has even been supported by British celebrities, including Top Gear’s Jeremy Clarkson, who wrote in The Sun: “I’m not a cat fan by any means—they give me asthma—and I can’t think of anything worse than spending time in the company of an animal-rights person called Boudicca Rising.
The case makes my blood boil because I am a dog fan. And if someone poisoned mine, I’d capture him and force him to live for a year with Boudicca Rising.” This whodunnit at times made me both sad and angry — after all, I too am a British animal lover — but it is a rollercoaster ride and a beautiful read.
Jenkins worried that, too often, the media furor minimized the impact of the killings on pet owners. “I had one police officer who went, ‘Waste of my time—it’s only a cat.’ I said, ‘Excuse me? It’s only a cat?’” Jenkins told me. “Imagine you get married, and your wife gets a cat.
You then have a child, and your child at the age of six has grown up with it, adores it, sleeps with it. And one morning your wife gets up, opens the curtains, and there’s your cat with no head, and no fucking tail, and your daughter’s about to go out and play. And you tell me it’s just a fucking cat.”
Whether we know it or not, most of us have some sort of philosophy of life. It may be as simple as, "Be kind to others," or it might be a very complex life philosophy. Many companies have some sort of philosophy as well. They may be unwritten or well-documented. When I worked at IBM, from 1974 through 1995, the IBM philosophy was well-documented and strongly ingrained in the culture.
IBM's philosophy covered its business practices and how employees, customers, and suppliers were to be treated. The IBM prime directive, as it were, was to treat everyone fairly, with respect and dignity.
Before I started working with Linux in some depth, I had never known that it had a philosophy. I mean, what could a philosophy actually do for an operating system? After a bit of research, I discovered that all operating systems have a philosophy. I also learned that the philosophy of an operating system matters.
For example, the philosophy of Windows is very similar to that of Digital Equipment Corporation's (DEC) VMS operating system. It amounts to "shield the users from everything that might get them into trouble."
Of course, the reason for this similarity is that the prime developer of Windows NT is the same person who developed VMS. The philosophy of both operating systems is based on the underlying belief that users are afraid of computers and need to be shielded from their complexity.
The MAC OS is not much different, although the Graphical User Interface (GUI) desktop takes an object-oriented approach that, in the opinion of many, provides a more consistent, integrated, and much smoother user experience.
Both MAC and Windows do provide a Command Line Interface (CLI) that allows low-level interaction between the user and the operating system. However, the Windows CLI is very limited with few commands, at least when compared to Linux and Unix.
The MAC CLI is a BASH shell that provides a great deal of power just as it does on Linux. However it is very difficult to find. The shell is buried in an avalanche of menu choices that can only be found if you know it is there and are actively looking for it.
When Unix was being developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s, the developers were intent upon building an operating system that was significantly different from the operating systems that preceded. The philosophy of Unix was markedly different from that of other operating systems. And the Linux philosophy is quite naturally derived directly from the Unix philosophy.
I find the following quote from the section Introduction of the Unix philosophy of the book Linux and the Unix Philosophy, by Mike Gancarz, quite informative.
An operating system, by its nature, embodies the philosophy of its creators. The creators of the Unix operating system started with a radical concept: they assumed that the user of their operating system would be computer literate from the start. The entire Unix philosophy revolves around the idea that the user knows what he or she is doing.
Wow! Did they really say that! It sounds pretty elitist and exclusive. But, not really. Quite the opposite is true in fact. One of my favorite quotes about Unix that also applies to Linux is often attributed to a person named Doug Gwyn but for whom no information can be reliably obtained.
Whether Doug exists or not, it is still a great quote: Unix was not designed to stop its users from doing stupid things, as that would also stop them from doing clever things.
And therein lies the truth about Linux. It never assumes that the user is incompetent. It always assumes you know what you are doing and allows you do do anything you tell it to. Anything. Whether it is unintentionally bad or not. That is a huge amount of power in the hands of a user.
Linux treats everyone equally and allows everyone the maximum amount of power. That is egalitarian. Other operating systems are elitist and exclusive because they withhold or hide their power behind an inflexible Graphical User Interface that allows one to do only what the developers think we should be allowed to do.
Over the years a number of people have attempted to enlighten the rest of us when they codified various aspects of the Linux philosophy. Mike Gancarz first wrote The Unix Philosophy and then followed it up with Linux and the Unix Philosophy. These books list 9 major tenets and 10 lesser tenets.
Eric Raymond has 17 Unix rules in his book, The Art of Unix programming. And, Oregon State University has it's own Linux philosophy which I think nicely depicts an engineer's view of Linux.
Rather than list all of these tenets and rules here, along with all of their implications, I have listed links or books in the References section of this article from which this information can be obtained. I leave it to you, dear reader, to look them up and find out what they mean. Believe me, it will be a very enlightening exercise.
The Linux philosophy is epitomized by the ease with which one can open a terminal emulator to access the CLI and its concomitant power. First, there are the multiple virtual terminals that can be accessed using the Ctrl-Alt-F [1-7] keys.
Even the Linux GUI desktops whispers, "Use the force, Luke," to all who use them. Linux has several fine GUI desktop environments from which to choose so that every user can choose the one he or she likes best. And yet, the power of the CLI is only a click away with many choices for both the terminal emulator and the shell.
My favorite terminal emulator for the GUI desktop is Konsole. Konsole allows multiple terminal sessions in a GUI window using tabs to switch between terminal sessions. Of course you can use your favorite shell in all sessions or a different shell in each session, depending upon your needs.
For even more flexibility, there is the screen program which provides for multiple shell sessions within a single terminal session. This is particularly useful when logging in remotely because if your connection fails the screen session continues along with all of the programs running in the various shells launched within the screen session.
The Linux CLI softly seduces; it tantalizes with its power. It's flexibility drew me in. It changed me—certainly it changed the way I use the computer. I still use the GUI desktop but as much to provide me with the flexibility of multiple Konsole sessions with screen running in them as to run programs like LibreOffice, Firefox, and Thunderbird.
Linux does not handhold. It assumes you know what you are doing when you type a command and it proceeds to execute that command without asking if you really want to. It gives you complete control. Imagine for a moment the chaos and frustration that would result from attempting to use a nail gun that asked you if you really wanted to shoot that nail and would not allow you to pull the trigger until you said the word “yes” aloud.
Linux allows you to use the nail gun as you choose. Other operating systems let you know that you can use nails but don't tell you what tool is used to insert the nails let alone allow you to put your own finger on the trigger.
Yes, there is danger where there is great power. Used wisely that power can also be harnessed to accomplish many great things. The Linux prime directive. I have come to believe that the summation of the Linux philosophy is quite simple. Treat all users with respect.
This amounts to allowing each user to do things her or his own way with a wide choice of powerful tools. It means making flexibility, simplicity, and freedom the foremost considerations when designing and building software systems. It has resulted in the creation of software that is such a work of art that it is still beautiful and going strong after almost 45 years for Unix and for more than 20 years for Linux.
How does all this translate into the real world? I will tell you more of my views in future articles where I will discuss some of the individual tenets and their applications to daily sysadmin tasks and other aspects of life with Linux.
The open source way is a set of principles derived from open source software development models and applied more broadly to additional industries and domains. Opensource.com exists to share how the open source way can change our world in the same way the open source model has changed software.
Transparency. Whether we're developing software or solving a business problem, we all have access to the information and materials necessary for doing our best work. And when these materials are accessible, we can build upon each other's ideas and discoveries. We can make more effective decisions and understand how decisions affect us.
Collaboration. When we're free to participate, we can enhance each other's work in unanticipated ways. When we can modify what others have shared, we unlock new possibilities. By initiating new projects together, we can solve problems that no one can solve alone. And when we implement open standards, we enable others to contribute in the future.
Release early and often. Rapid prototypes can lead to rapid discoveries. An iterative approach leads to better solutions faster. When you're free to experiment, you can look at problems in new ways and seek answers in new places. You can learn by doing.
Inclusive meritocracy. Good ideas can come from anywhere, and the best ideas should win. Only by including diverse perspectives in our conversations can we be certain we've identified the best ideas, and decision-makers continually seek those perspectives. We may not operate by consensus, but successful work determines which projects gather support and effort from the community.
Community. Communities form when different people unite around a common purpose. Shared values guide decision making, and community goals supersede individual interests and agendas.
Each of the commands in the sample program is fairly small, and each performs a specific task. The sort command, for example does only one thing. It sorts the data stream sent to it via Standard Input and sends the results to Standard Output.
It can perform numeric, alphabetic and alphanumeric sorts in forward and reverse order. But it does nothing else. It only sorts but it is very, very good at that. Because it is very small, having only 2614 lines of code, it is also very fast.
Large monolithic programs get feature bloat and lack the flexibility of many small, well written programs. Write programs that do one thing and do it well
The programs that make up the GNU utilities, as well as many other Linux utility programs are almost invariably written to perform a single task; and each performs its assigned task very well. Large programs that perform many tasks cannot be written to cover every possibility that a user or administrator might want or need to perform.
Using the capabilities of many small, functionally targeted programs and stringing them together with pipes and redirection allows for an amazing array of possibilities, far more creative and diverse than the original programmers could conceive.
Prototype as Soon as Possible. Change is inevitable, so when creating new code use high level languages, i.e., scripting languages like BASH and Perl. Get regular feedback from the customer to verify correct functioning of the program.
It may never need to use compiled language to write code when following these guidelines. Thus your code is Open and Discoverable to others.“Open” means that the code can be read by a human being. “Discoverable” means that the logic and the functioning of the code is easily apparent.
Choose Portability Over Efficiency. Extreme efficiency requires OS and hardware explicit hacks and is rarely portable because of that. If the code  runs fast enough it meets your needs. In any event Next Month’s hardware will run faster.
The portability of shell scripts can be far more efficient in the long run than the perceived efficiency of writing a program in a compiled language—not even considering the time required to compile and test such a program—because they can run on many otherwise incompatible systems.
For example, I worked on the email system at the State of North Carolina for several years. I was responsible for a collection of Perl and BASH CGI programs that ran on a Red Hat Linux host.
These programs provided remote users in all of our 100 counties and hundreds of large and small agencies to perform account maintenance for their users. I was asked to test the possibility of moving all of these programs to Red Hat running on an IBM Z-series mainframe.
I created a tarball from the existing programs, data, and configuration files, copied the tarball to a Red Hat instance on the mainframe and untarred it. I made one configuration change to the Apache httpd.conf file—I changed the IP Address on which Apache listened.
I started Apache and everything worked as it was supposed to with no other changes required. This all took about ten minutes and is an excellent example of true portability. Had those programs been compiled, I would have had to recompile them and remove any hardware specific efficiencies that we might have programmed in. Portable code runs anywhere so why spend time porting compiled code to other platforms?
Store Data in Flat Text Files. Text is the Universal Interface. It is Portable and it is Open and Discoverable. Special tools are not required to manage Linux configuration files, your favorite text editor will do fine. All binary formats are by their very nature obscure and proprietary, for example the Windows registry, which is the antithesis of this tenet. Use Software Leverage
Software leverage means a couple things to me. First, and in the context of this example, it means that by using four command line commands, we are leveraging the work of the programmers who created those commands with over 7,000 lines of C code. That is code that we do not have to create.
We are leveraging the efforts of those other, under-appreciated programmers to accomplish the task we have set for ourselves. Another aspect of software leverage is that good programmers write good code and great programmers borrow good code. Never rewrite code that has already been written.
One of the great advantages of Open Source software at all levels, from the kernel, through the GNU and other utilities, and all the way up to complex applications, is that there is an incredibly large amount of well-written and tested source code out there that can do almost anything you want to do.
Just find the pieces you need and include them in your own code. I use my own code over many times in different programs. I also use a lot of code written by other folks when it meets my needs. Either way, it saves me a lot of work and keeps me from having to reinvent perfectly good code.
In the 1940s, the 1950s, and through at least part of the 1960s, each programmer not only had to write the application program which performed a specific function, he or she also had to write all of the very low level instructions which moved the data between the components of the computer.
In addition, the programmer had to write those same instructions for managing data flow in the computer every time a new application program was written. This duplication of effort was very time consuming and wasteful.
Finally, some smart programmer said “Aren’t computers supposed to save people time in repetitive tasks? Why don’t we apply that to us programmers as well?”. In 1956, programmers at General Motors Research Labs, in cooperation with North American Aviation, did exactly that; they wrote a program which they called Input/Output System, which simplified the application programmers’ task.
This I/O System incorporated all of the common groups of instructions which were routinely used to move data from one place in the computer to another into libraries of common functions to which each programmer would have access. These libraries, once having been developed, were then used many times by many different programmers in many different applications.
In 1957, IBM announced its Input/Output Control System (IOCS) which provided the same type of functionality. IOCS provided programmers with standard instruction groups which could be used repeatedly for input and output operations.
These control programs allowed for the execution of one program at a time. The computer operator ran the payroll program. When the payroll program was finished, the operator could run an inventory program or accounts receivable, or whatever job was next in line. This is a single tasking environment, like DOS on personal computers.
To run an application program under IOCS, an operator would place a special card (this was in the days of eighty column punched cards) called a bootstrap loader into the read hopper of the card reader attached to the system.
Behind this card was placed the application program, and then behind the program, the operator placed the deck of data cards. After the cards were loaded into the reader, the operator pressed the LOAD button on the computer. The computer was just smart enough to read one card from the hopper of the card reader; this was the bootstrap loader.
At this point, the computer turned control over to the bootstrap loader which was just smart enough to be able to load the rest of the application program and turn control of the computer over to it. If more than one application needed to be run, the operator would wait until the first application had finished. Then, he or she would place the bootstrap loader into the input hopper of the card reader, place the application and data decks in behind, and press the LOAD button again.
In 1962, IBM developed IBSYS, which provided not only for standard I/O instruction groups, but also supervised the operation of the computer. IBSYS supervised the loading and operation of application programs by allowing automatic sequential execution of multiple programs.
It allowed multiple programs and their data to be placed in the input hopper of the card reader and it automatically executed each of those programs, one after the other.
No more bootstrap loader was required in front of every application program. IBSYS also provided messages to the system operator to mount or dismount tapes and disk packs, as well as to change the paper in the printer so that checks could now be printed, for example, instead of invoices.
This capability is very much like the batch files of DOS, Windows and OS/2 which can be used to execute a sequence of commands and programs. Shell scripts in Unix and Linux perform a similar function to batch files, allowing sequential execution of a long series of commands. But shell scripts are far more advanced and can provide very complex program control and management functions.
IBM introduced the IBM System/360 in 1964, and with it, a new operating system, OS/360. OS/360 was a multitasking operating system, which now allowed systems to process a continuous flow of many different types of jobs with minimal intervention from the operators.
Multitasking meant that multiple programs could be loaded into the computer and executed simultaneously. The multitasking capability of OS/360 was initially limited to a maximum of three programs, however. Later operating systems provided the capability to multitask as many programs as the computer had the resources to allow.
Even when the original IBM PC was released in 1981, some applications were written with their own very basic operating system so that they would be ready on the same day that the PC was announced. This was because neither DOS nor any other OS was ready when those application companies had to start creating their programs.
How closely is that followed today? Relatively well, so far as using text stream goes. A majority of Linux programs continue to use plain text configuration files, which means that users can easily edit them, using the text editor of their choice.
However, there are a few exceptions. GRUB 2, for example, discourages manual editing, automating new entries after a new kernel or operating system is added. Similarly, Systemd uses binary files for its logs, while KDE's Akonadi, by making use of a database, ensures that any failure will be catastrophic, and unrepairable manually.
Such changes are usually made in the name of efficiency. All too often, however, the efficiency is gained by interfering with the do-it-yourself ethos that should almost be a fourth pillar of the Unix Philosophy.
The situation is even better when it comes to programs working well together. In modern Linux, open standards are a rule with very few exceptions. For instance, GIMP and Krita have their own formats, but, thanks to the innumerable open graphics formats, files are exchangeable with very few problems.
The problems that do exist are largely a matter of how formats are interpreted. For example, transferring files in Open Document Format between LibreOffice and Calligra Suite can result in inconsistencies such as changes in color.
Correcting these inconsistencies is unglamorous work, which is perhaps one reason why improvement is slow, but, these days, even a relatively highly formatted MS Word document can be handled reasonably successfully in Linux.
True, something like a MS Word brochure rapidly crumbles into gibberish when exchanged, but the progress over the last decade is noticeable. If the situation is not ideal, at least the ideal is recognized. However, modern Linux's greatest departure from the Unix Philosophy is having one small program do one thing well. In fact, the idea has been largely abandoned.
You can see the change quite clearly. Image Magick, for example, is the name for a collection of individual scripts for editing graphics. By contrast, Krita is a collection of features integrated into a common interface. Similarly, groff/troff are a collection of options for editing plain text files, LibreOffice an interface with similar features integrated into it that supports multiple formats.
Without actually counting, I suspect that Krita has more features than Image Magick, and LibreOffice more than groff/troff (although I could be wrong), but the main difference is that, as desktop projects, Krita and LibreOffice offer convenience at the cost of being vastly larger programs.
In a few corners, such as the Slackware community, the ideal is still alive. From LibreOffice to KDE, more than one program does not accompany a Slackware release because it is actually a loose collection of dozens of programs.
However, many people want these excluded programs, so they are easy to find in online repositories or else in derivative-distributions. Refugees from Windows in particular seem to want to have large programs that do everything, and the majority of distributions do not even try to control them.
Even if official efforts are made to have one program do one thing, the unoffical efforts to bypass this principle more or less reduce the official efforts to empty gestures before they are done.
The Unix Philosophy cannot be enforced, and, even if it could be, whether it should be is uncertain. After all, if people want a huge office suite, is anything wrong with giving them one, especially when memory shortages are no longer a concern? Anyway, as the acronym says, GNU's Not Unix, so why should it be expected to follow Unix conventions?
At the same time, the Unix Philosophy can be said to encourage elegant and economical solutions. In weakening its tenets, and abandoning one almost entirely, Linux may have not only abandoned its roots, but, perhaps, some of its excellence as well.
The Unix philosophy lies at the core of not only the original UNIX as developed by Ken Thompson at Bell Labs from 1969 but also of its numerous direct descendants and clones, including Solaris, the BSDs1 and Linux.
It has made them, collectively referred to as Unix-like operating systems, into what are widely considered to be the best2 operating systems to have been developed to date, despite the fact that they are by far the oldest operating systems in widespread use, and it has been a major factor in the rapid growth and increasing success of Linux.
There is no single, standardized statement of the philosophy. But if it had to be described with only a single word, that word would be modularity, which refers to a system that is composed of components (i.e., modules) that can be fitted together or arranged in a variety of ways.
Modularity is common in nature, and its application to man-made products (both goods and services) has been a key factor in the development and advance of industrial societies. Yet, it was relatively little used for computer software prior to the development of UNIX, and even today its great benefits fail to be fully exploited by other operating systems, most notably the Microsoft Windows systems.
A slightly longer, and more conventional, statement of the Unix philosophy, but one which says essentially the same thing, would be: Design programs to do only a single thing, but to do it well, and to work together well with other programs.
The philosophy is commonly described with a series of brief rules or tenets4. Although they all generally follow logically from the concept of modularity (e.g., small size, efficiency, simple interfaces and ease of understanding), it can be useful to state and discuss them individually.
Among these tenets is the the so-called rule of composition, which states that programs (of which a modular operating system is composed) should be designed to be easily connected to other programs. Another is the rule of silence, which states that programs should, by default, say nothing (i.e., have no output) other than that which is interesting, unusual or surprising.
A serious attempt is made to apply the principle of modularity to everything on a Unix-like system, not only programs but also parts of programs, such as algorithms, and even the kernel (i.e., the core of the operating system).
Thus, a Unix-like operating system generally (or at least ideally) consists of a small kernel together with a large number of small, specialized programs that can interact with each other through a variety of well-defined interfaces.
The most familiar of these interfaces, and one of the most important innovations of UNIX, is the pipe. Represented by the vertical bar character in commands typed in by the user, pipes allow the combining of programs so that the output of one becomes the input of another.
Such pipelines of commands make it possible to easily perform highly specialized operations that would be difficult or virtually impossible using a non-modular system.
Another major tenet of the philosophy is to use plain text (i.e., human readable alphanumeric characters) rather than binary files (which are not fully human readable) to the extent possible for the inputs and outputs of programs and for configuration files.
This is because plain text is a universal interface; that is, it can allow programs to easily interact with each other in the form of text outputs and inputs, in contrast to the difficulty that they would have if each used mutually incompatible binary formats and because such files can be easily interfaced with humans.
The latter means that it is easy for humans to study, correct, improve and extend such files as well as to port (i.e., modify) them to new platforms (i.e., other combinations of operating systems and hardware).
In addition to making Unix-like operating systems more efficient and easier to use, the Unix philosophy also facilitates their development and improvement. This is because the use of small, specialized (i.e., modularized) programs makes it far easier for developers to improve them than would be the case with large, multifunctional programs.
One reason is that smaller programs can be sufficiently small and simple so that they can be comprehended by a single human mind, whereas large and complex programs generally cannot. It is also because such specialization makes it practical for development (including improvements) to be widely scattered rather than being concentrated at one or a few central locations.
The Unix philosophy grew out of the original design goal of UNIX, which was to create an operating system that was as simple and efficient as possible. This goal was a reaction to what Thompson correctly viewed as the unnecessary complexity of the operating systems that were in use at that time.
Such complexity was related to the fact that there was no standard operating system that could be used on a wide variety of computers; rather, each computer manufacturer developed a separate operating system for its own hardware.
Another important factor in Thompson's desire for maximum simplicity and efficiency was the fact that he initially wrote his operating system for a computer, the PDP-7, that had an extremely small main memory of only 4000 18-bit words. (However, this was considered quite adequate when the computer was built in 1965, especially given its low cost, of only U.S.$72,000 for a basic model.)
Although the size and complexity of Unix-like operating systems has increased greatly over subsequent decades in response to the continuous drop in memory costs and increases in CPU (central processing unit) performance, the legacy of the original simplicity lives on, and Unix-like operating systems are still far more modular than most other systems, most notably the Microsoft Windows systems.
The decline in UNIX market share that began in the 1990s relative to the Microsoft Windows systems was sometimes attributed to the perception that UNIX was an old, clunky system that had outlived its usefulness. That is, software was something to be shared and improved for everyone's benefit rather than something to be hoarded for the sake of increasing corporate profits.
However, it turned out that this decline was, in fact, not due to any inherent defect in either the philosophy or the operating system itself, nor was it due to any inherent superiority of the Microsoft systems. Rather, it was the result of the fact that the philosophy was designed for a different era, one in which software was treated like mathematics or scientific knowledge.
Thus, rather than discarding the philosophy, something additional was needed so that operating systems based on it could again prosper and grow in this new environment. This addition came in the form of the concept of free software licensing, which keeps software free not only in a monetary sense but also with regard to use (including copying, modifying, extending and redistributing).
Particularly important in this context was the development of the concept of copyleft, which precludes the emergence of dominant versions that require the use of expensive hardware and that also promotes compatibility among the various versions without inhibiting innovation.
The result has been a returning ownership of Unix-like operating systems and application programs for use with them to the public as a whole and a consequent reinvigoration of technological development. The Unix philosophy is clearly very different from the philosophy behind the Microsoft Windows operating systems. In fact, those systems are characterized by some of the opposite qualities. Most fundamentally, they are monolithic (i.e., lack modularity).
Specific characteristics include extremely large program sizes, great complexity of the source code, an apparent lack of craftsmanship on many aspects (such as poor security), a lack of transparency (the source code is a closely guarded secret) and the absence of portability (i.e., can only run on one basic type of processor).
Source code (also referred to as source or code) is the version of software (usually an application program or an operating system) as it is originally written (i.e., typed into a computer) by a human in plain text. It can be written in any of numerous programming languages, some of the most popular of which are C, C++, Java, Perl, PHP, Python and Tcl/Tk.
This sharp contrast is only natural, as the Microsoft Windows operating systems, like much other proprietary (i.e., commercial) software, originated in a different era and are governed by a very different set of priorities.
That is, the emphasis is on gaining or maintaining market share and maximizing profits, and little attention is paid to the priorities of the original UNIX developers. The very different development model (e.g., centralized versus dispersed development) also likely plays a role.
Of course, there is nothing necessarily wrong with these market-oriented goals. In fact, they are, in general, beneficial, as they are what has been responsible for much of the tremendous economic growth that has occurred around the world during the past millennium.
Yet, as economists would be quick to point out, these goals work for the maximum benefits to society only where free competition (i.e., many sellers and buyers competing on the basis of price and quality) exists, and not where markets have (for whatever reasons) become monopolistic (i.e., characterized by only a single supplier or seller of a product with no good substitutes).
In all fairness, it should be mentioned that the various Unix-like operating systems have not always completely conformed to their idealized philosophy either. In a way, these goals are a bit like democracy -- there is a tendency to stray, but the inherent virtue of the concept keeps pulling it back.
The great success of UNIX and its philosophy has had effects far beyond the original operating system as it was developed at Bell Labs and subsequently at the University of California at Berkeley (UCB). Perhaps most significantly, they form the basis for Linux, which is now the most rapidly growing operating system and which many computer experts expect could become the dominant system for many applications in the future.
Linux has been able to bring the advantages of the Unix philosophy back into prominence and restore Unix-like operating systems taken as a whole to their former leadership role largely through the use of free software licensing.
Also fundamental to its success, and the growing success of other free software as well, has been the availability of the Internet for allowing collaboration of programmers around the world. In addition to operating systems, the Unix-philosophy has also played a major role in the swift development and astonishing success of the Internet.
This has done a great deal to level the playing field and allow free software to compete effectively with proprietary software (and possibly even endanger the proprietary software development model) despite the massive financial resources of the latter.
In fact, the use of free software licensing together with the ability for programmers (as well as testers and general users) to participate in the development process irrespective of geographical location or organizational membership has further extended the basic concept of the Unix philosophy (i.e., modularity) and has resulted in a large increase in benefits. This is what could be termed the Linux philosophy.
It has accomplished this not only by providing an outstanding operating system on which to base much of that network, but also by demonstrating the value of modularization for both the hardware and software aspects of it, which are major factors in its outstanding performance, including its high degree of robustness and scalability.
Others, he suggests, sign up because they think the training will help them overthrow the state, while a third group become disillusioned and radicalised as a result of their experience in the ranks. "They feel taken advantage of, not understood and lied to," he says.
One of these is a friend who Mike has seen on social media showing support for an anti-government militia group. "He served for 16 to 20 years and he's been to two wars - two wars that were about a lie," Mike says, referring to Iraq and Afghanistan.
Last month the Institute for Strategic Dialogue released a report looking at discussion of the military by far-right extremists on the messaging app Telegram. They found a small number of extremists claimed to be veterans, but they also saw that the military was generally discussed in a negative light. "This is largely due to the perception that the US's interventions abroad serve Israeli interests rather than those of the white race," the report says.
Mike also started to believe that America's wars were pointless, but he accepted his racism was pointless too. "I started kind of realising, about 70 years later than everybody else, that Hitler was clearly wrong," he says.
As Mike's ideas on race started to change he got in touch with Christian Picciolini, a former neo-Nazi who now channels his energies into deradicalisation. "He told me to practise empathy, being non-judgmental, being honest, and always being self-reflective - essentially to find a way to make good happen," Mike says.
He started working at a music venue and became enamoured of the punk rock scene. It was the outlet that he needed for anger he'd built up from his unsettled childhood. Punk became his saviour.
"My punk rock community has been the one of the biggest things in getting me out. I think how vital it is to have an outlet and to have a group where you feel like you belong. But a constructive group," he says. After his medical leave ran out, Mike didn't return to the military and was classified as Awol. Then, last December, to his surprise, he was honourably discharged.
Sometimes he worries that extremism still has a grip over him. Towards the end of 2019 a deli that he was working in was robbed by two young black men and an older woman was assaulted, Mike tried to stop them and they pulled out a gun. Later that night Mike recognised the same ugly, dehumanising, racist ideas crowding his thoughts again but he fought against them.
As he clawed his way out of the extremist rabbit hole, he saw some Americans fall deeper into it. Oakland and Kenosha weren't the only places where Black Lives Matters protesters were injured and Mike was horrified by the attack on Capitol Hill.
The US is a loosely bound "union of otherwise warring clans", he says. "And when you decide to drop a match on it, it can get incredibly dangerous. I've already seen a tremendous amount of violence."
Mike wants people to understand how easy it is in America today for extremist ideology to take over someone's life. "I've made continual efforts to be anti-racist, to be actively anti-racist. But it is difficult and I don't want to pretend like it isn't."
"I was a teenager with basic internet access in suburban California, and I became radicalised enough to want to commit acts of violence against people because of the colour of their skin or their religion," he says.
"I was supercharged, like really supercharged. I mean, there was no doubt in my mind that I wanted to go to somebody else's country, whether it be Iraq or Afghanistan, put on a uniform and pick up a gun and kill them."
In the weeks before he began his military training, he spent hours in his garage drinking and chain-smoking cigarettes, full of rage. "I almost always had a gun with me," he says. "And I was at the point where if somebody had told me to do something, I would have done it."
In that period, he could have become a Steven Carillo, he now fears - though there was another incident later in 2020 where this feeling hit him with particular intensity. A few months after the protests in Oakland, rioting engulfed Kenosha in Wisconsin when a black man was shot in an encounter with police.
A 17-year-old boy called Kyle Rittenhouse joined a vigilante group formed to defend the city from what an organiser called "evil thugs". He shot three people with an AR-15 semi-automatic rifle and is now on trial accused of intentional homicide and recklessly endangering safety. Mike found it hard to read about. "I look at that young teenager and I'm like, 'Wow, that was really close to being me,'" he says.
In February this year, the Pentagon issued a "stand down" against extremism - an order to leaders across the military to address extremism in their troops. At the same time, Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin set up a working group to determine how to spot "insider threats" and explained that prospective recruits would now be screened for extremist affiliations.
These moves came after early analyses of those arrested in the Capitol Hill riots on 6 January suggested a troubling proportion were acting or former servicemen and women - including Ashli Babbitt, an Air Force veteran killed by a police officer as she tried to break through a barricaded door.
A 2020 Military Times online poll of 1,108 readers on active duty, found that just under a third had seen signs of racist or white supremacist behaviour within the military. But perhaps surprisingly, for Mike the military would be the start of his journey out of far-right extremism.
Among those charged with offences in 2020 - apart from Steve Carillo - were US Army private Ethan Melzer, accused of preparing the ground for a deadly ambush on his unit by sending information to a neo-Nazi group, and three extremist veterans accused of carrying Molotov cocktails to throw at police during a Black Lives Matter protest in Las Vegas.
Proud boys and antifa: When a right-wing activist met a left-wing anti-fascist. The teenager who saved a man with an SS tattoo. 'I was a neo-Nazi - then I fell in love with a black woman'. In late 2017, he was in the second month of his training, stationed deep in the woods of Missouri.
"I was just stuck in the middle of nowhere with all sorts of people from all over the US - including black guys, Jewish guys, a guy from Guam who taught me how to spear fish," he says. "I was making friends with people who I would never have considered being friends with before."
He found military boot camp difficult. The hours were gruelling and the lack of autonomy - the control that his superiors had over his every move - was hard to deal with."It's one thing to be some kid, chain-smoking and reading 4chan and getting riled up in your garage," he says. "To then finding yourself in the middle of nowhere, on an Air Force base that you cannot leave and people are screaming at you."
He was miserable and tried to quit basic training six times in eight weeks. His mother wasn't talking to him - he thinks perhaps she knew he had joined the military for the wrong reasons. Letters were a lifeline for recruits but in the first five weeks Mike received none. When the other trainees had time each week to read their letters, Mike sat alone wallowing in his misery.
One day another recruit, who was black, noticed this. "Hey man," he said, picking up a Bible. "Let's pray together." It was one of many small gestures that helped Mike to survive basic training and ultimately changed his outlook on life. "Why are you helping me?" Mike thought. "I thought you wanted to destroy me."
Over the next few weeks, this recruit and another young Jewish man would support Mike through his darkest moments, with a friendly pat on the back when he was struggling or a quiet, "Hey man, you can do this."
During training he was also removed from the echo chamber that had been reinforcing his racist beliefs. He didn't have time to go online and without the toxic propaganda that had filled his days, hate was loosening its grip on him.
By the time he emerged from basic training Mike knew he didn't want to be in the military. He spent several months working at an Air Force base, but he was deeply depressed. He reached his lowest ebb shortly before he was due to be sent to Afghanistan.
"I knew I was being deployed. I was under a lot of stress, [there was] just too much alcohol about one night and access to a firearm." He came close to killing himself and was put on unpaid medical leave. It's an episode he finds difficult to discuss.
Although in his case basic training helped him break away from extremism, Mike doesn't think it's a coincidence that a number of those involved in far-right violence in recent years served in the military. He believes that some extremists may join the military, as he did, eager for an opportunity to kill people of a different race.
In his late teens, Mike became a Nazi. Now, only six years later, he is a supporter of Black Lives Matter - and it worries him deeply to think how close he came, at the angriest stage of his life, to going out with his gun and shooting people.
When Mike locked eyes for a brief moment with the man who had just fallen to the ground, he could tell that he was going to die. It was a frantic night in downtown Oakland, California, and the wind was sharp with the sting of tear gas as it whipped palm trees up into a frenzy. Three days after the murder of George Floyd, protests in support of Black Lives Matter were breaking out across the US.
Mike had been protesting with his girlfriend but as night fell and the police started firing rubber bullets and tear gas, they decided to leave. They were walking back to their car, along streets filled with the black smoke of burning rubbish bins, when they saw a white van pull up. Then they heard the gunshots.
The van pulled away as a man in uniform slumped to the ground. Mike moved towards him, trying to remember the first aid training he had learned in the military. But a police car arrived and a jittery gun-wielding officer jumped out and ordered Mike to leave.
Later he learned that Dave Patrick Underwood, a federal officer who had been guarding the courthouse, had died at the scene. More than a year on, it still haunts Mike that he couldn't do more to save him. By coincidence, Mike had a connection to Underwood; he had been marching that day with members of his family.
But he was also connected to the man who was later charged with his murder. Steven Carillo was a sergeant at the same California Air Force base where Mike had enlisted just a few years earlier. And that wasn't all.
Mike had a secret. At home in his wardrobe there was a uniform made of grey-green khaki fabric, with a Nazi symbol on the collar. Mike kept it hanging there to remind himself of the person he used to be, someone who wanted to go out and kill people.Like Carillo, Mike had fallen down the rabbit hole of extremism, and become a follower of America's violent far-right.
In the summer before Mike's final year at school he watched as the first wave of Black Lives Matter protests rolled out across the US, but taking part was the furthest thing from his mind. "I thought they were Satan incarnate," he says.
He had just met a new friend through a messaging group online. Paul (not his real name) invited Mike to visit his home, where he lived with his parents. It was an ordinary house on a quiet cul-de-sac in an upmarket suburb of a major US city. They were meeting to "shoot some propaganda videos".
Paul opened the door in full Nazi uniform. He took Mike straight to his garage. "It was just like a clothing store for Nazis," Mike says. The walls were lined with weapons - ammunition, cartridges and many guns."
Paul had gathered a few other young men for the shoot. They loaded guns and ammunition into a truck and drove out to some nearby hills. "We were on a state park firing semi-automatic and automatic weapons, filming and running around in Nazi uniforms," Mike says. Then the park rangers appeared. Paul was annoyed.
"He was just kind of standing there and he's not really having any of it. He's not wanting to listen to this government authority telling him that he cannot do what he thinks he's entitled to do, which is make videos and pretend to be the Wehrmacht [the armed forces of Nazi Germany]."
The rangers confiscated all the guns they could see, but the boys had hidden some of them and just loaded them back in the truck once they were alone again. Then they went back to Paul's house and hung out with his parents - still wearing their Nazi uniforms. Mike was 17 and says he had become the perfect vessel for toxic extremism.
He had spent his childhood in a small, rural, mostly white town. Days were spent kayaking on the lake or cycling around town with his tight-knit group of friends. Adults and kids would hang out together and dinner parties and barbecues were spontaneous. It was a place where everybody knew everybody.
But Mike's stepfather was an alcoholic who could lash out violently, and when Mike was 12 his mother got a divorce and moved with the children to another part of the country. They were also much less well off now, and the stepfather - whom Mike had been close to, despite his violent outbursts - never kept a promise to visit the children.
Suddenly Mike was living in a sweltering, multi-racial urban neighbourhood, and he hated it. "There were people there who didn't look like anything that I had ever seen before, the food was different, the water tasted different, everything just completely different."
Encouraged by the father of a friend, Mike began listening to right-wing talk show host Sean Hannity, and when he searched for similar content online he found alt-right videos and podcasts on Facebook and YouTube. Social media algorithms were already creating what is known as the rabbit-hole effect - leading him to content that became more and more extreme.
Here he was told, for example, that divorce was a Jewish conspiracy meant to destroy the ideal white family. "For whatever reason, for me that was easier to believe than that my stepdad was a degenerate alcoholic," he says.
Eventually Mike migrated to the darkest corners of the internet - to white nationalist message boards on 4chan and 8chan. These sites were like a social club for racists, Nazis and white nationalists, where people could say the N-word while getting to know one another, Mike says.
He started exchanging messages with a group of neo-Nazis in the San Francisco Bay area and that is how he ended up on Paul's doorstep that summer afternoon. "I was just looking for a place to put all my anger," Mike says. "And it found a perfect home."
A year later, Mike finished school. When he didn't get into his preferred universities, he said he would join the Navy instead, but his mother was against the idea. They settled on a completely different plan - Mike would go to a business school in London.
In the UK, Mike expected bowler hats and gentlemen - his image of London was like something out of a Victorian novel. The reality was very different. His school was in Whitechapel, an area with a vibrant Muslim community.
"I was an 18-year-old, radical white nationalist deeply fearful, deeply Islamophobic and I arrived in Whitechapel at a flat that was sandwiched between the Royal London Hospital and the East London Mosque," he says. "I definitely didn't see the diversity there as a positive thing, I looked at it as an example of everything that was wrong in the world."
During his time in London, Mike sank deeper and deeper into white nationalism. Most of his activity was online - he digitally stalked and harassed American left-wing celebrities for months with a team of other extremists - though one day he also walked up to a mosque and dropped a packet of bacon on the doorstep.
He stopped going to classes and after a few months he got a letter from the Home Office that his student visa was going to be revoked.One afternoon in April 2017, he was on his way to meet some friends at a pub on Parliament Square. While he was on the train passengers were told that Westminster station had been closed because of a police operation - they had to get off at the station before.
A vehicle had mounted the footpath on Westminster Bridge at 70mph and mowed down pedestrians. The driver then got out and stabbed a police officer; six people died, including the attacker, and 50 were injured. Mike emerged from the Tube station to a scene of panic. The sight of two children wrapped in foil blankets handed out by the emergency services is imprinted on his mind.
At this stage, IS was still a powerful force in the Middle East. It said it was responsible for the attack, one of a number carried out across Europe while it was at its most influential.
Mike tried to sign up to the military the next day. Some of the white nationalists he had been speaking to online were military men and he took his cue from them. He was rejected from the RAF because of his nationality, but within weeks he was back in California enlisting with the USAF.
At first glance, Aliyah looks like any other 24-year-old - she loves fashion, posts selfies on Instagram and appears happy. But her smile conceals a background of abuse and exploitation - a pattern that experts warn is all too common among forgotten teenage girls.
Aliyah's earliest memories are not of family trips and teddy bears. Instead, she recalls coming home from school and feeling relieved if she saw the front window was open. It meant her dad was letting in air.
Aliyah didn't know much about drugs back then. But she'd learned the open window meant he'd be in a good mood: "Whereas if the window is shut there was no smoke, so Daddy doesn't have what he needs," she says.
At the time, no-one outside the family knew what went on behind closed doors in their house in south London. She says there was violence in the household and sometimes it would be inflicted on Aliyah. She and her sister would hug each other on their bunk bed crying themselves to sleep at night.
At times, money was scarce and, as a result, food could be as well - Aliyah recalls days when there was none in the house at all and she'd go to school hungry. But against all the odds, Aliyah eventually managed to turn her life around.
It would be years before Aliyah and her siblings were picked up by social services. Aliyah feels strongly that opportunities for safeguarding her and her siblings were missed - she remembers her parents putting on their "best faces" when authorities came around.
Stories like hers follow a classic pattern, says Kendra Houseman, a consultant in child criminal activity: "If home is not a safe place, that makes them vulnerable to exploitation." And she warns there are many more hidden girls out there like Aliyah.
One sunny day, when she was eight, Aliyah's dad had friends round to celebrate his birthday. Someone gave Aliyah champagne. She drank so much she had to be taken to hospital with alcohol poisoning.
It was the beginning of Aliyah's descent into alcohol abuse. "After that, I'd just drink - I'd always want to drink," she says. By 13, Aliyah had become dependent on alcohol. "Drink became a problem - I was drinking because I was depressed."
Amanda Kirton's documentary Hidden Girls looks at the forgotten world of girls in gangs and the extent to which they are criminally and sexually exploited. Her parents' marriage broke down, her father left the family home and over time it became what is known in drug circles as a trap house - a property where drugs and weapons were held, and in which dealers would congregate.
Aliyah remembers being left alone there one time. "I was 10, left with all these drug dealers in my house," she says. Still a young child, she assumed it was her fault, somehow: "I honestly didn't know what I'd done."
There was one man, a regular visitor at the trap house, who noticed something was amiss. "He showed more genuine care," she says. He would look after Aliyah, became a friend and remains in contact with her to this day. "I think he saw a little girl that didn't have her parents, the way she needed to have her parents, and I think he just wanted to show a bit of support here and there when he could."
But although Aliyah was on the child protection register she was still allowed to live in those circumstances - and Aliyah finds the conduct of the authorities difficult to understand. "I think they missed a lot of things," she says. "In this day and age, if that was going on in the home, the child will be gone straight away."
Aliyah says she was moved between around 20 foster homes over a three-year period. She would run away and sleep rough. She'd drink until she blacked out. At school her behaviour grew worse - she'd break things and bully other children.
She remembers feeling as though she had no way out - that she was existing in survival mode. She self-harmed and tried to take her life on many occasions. Eventually, when Aliyah was 12, she was taken into foster care. However, by that time she was already a deeply troubled child.
While hanging around with older teenagers, she was drawn into a world of crime, violence and drugs. Aliyah began stealing, robbing and beating people up - the trauma of her childhood had set her on a destructive path, she says.
Soon she gained a reputation - if someone in the gang stepped out of line, Aliyah would be the one given the job of punishing them physically. "It was years of hurting myself and hurting other people," she says. "It was because of what I went through - the things that I didn't deserve to go through, it was affecting me.
"It did rob me of my childhood. It was taken away from me way too young. I couldn't get it back because things just got worse after that." All this made her a prime target for grooming. Eventually, Aliyah met an older man in his 20s who convinced her they were in a relationship. "I thought I was in love with him," she says.
But the reality was very different. "He had me selling his drugs for him," she says. "I couldn't tell that I was being exploited." Soon enough, they broke up. Rita Jacobs, a social worker in London, says this "boyfriend model" of exploitation is one that she has observed with increasing regularity.
"Some girls, they are unaware that they are actually being exploited - they do believe that they are in a romantic relationship with a partner, and what they don't realise is that partner is actually a perpetrator," says Jacobs.
Aliyah's grooming took place offline. But Hannah Ruschen, child safety online policy officer with the NSPCC, says that in the decade since, technology has made it even easier to target and exploit vulnerable girls.
According to the charity, 5,441 Sexual Communication with a Child offences were recorded in England and Wales during 2020/21 - a rise of 9% on the previous year and an increase of 69% from 2017/18, when the offence was first introduced.
The NSPCC also says over 80% of children who are groomed online are girls and that most of those children are aged 12-15. At the age of 14, Aliyah ran away from her foster carers. She stayed at various friends' houses. She knew she'd been reported missing so couldn't go out.
"Because of the way that there's constant access to the child via the internet, it can happen very quickly," says Ruschen. "It can go from a simple act like a friend request and very quickly escalate to the sharing of images online."
Eventually the isolation became too much for her and she handed herself in at a police station. She was given a youth referral order and, for the first time, placed in a care home. She didn't know it at the time, but this marked the first stage in turning her life around.
By the time she arrived at Bridges Lane, a sprawling building in Croydon, south London, Aliyah was 15. When she arrived, she put on a front, as though she wasn't afraid, but deep down she was - this was a new experience for her.
On her first day, an adult member of staff laid down the rules: there was a curfew and she had to be home on time. Every night all the residents would sit down and eat dinner with care workers.
"She just laid the law down to me and that's what I needed," Aliyah recalls. She'd never experienced discipline before. "I loved it. I just didn't show it, because I didn't trust no-one."
Aliyah had a rocky start at Bridges Lane - misbehaving, seeing how far she could push boundaries. "I think I was testing them, but I was also crying out for help," she says. "I needed a family. I just wanted to just cry and hug someone and I got to do that here. And I met Rowena."
Rowena Miller was her assigned key worker - this was Rowena's very first job. Somehow Aliyah instantly knew that Rowena ultimately had her back. It was the first time in her life that she felt that someone believed in her.
"I was definitely traumatised from my life," she says. "And a bit of that still lives in me now. "I know how to manage it a lot more than how I did before - because I didn't know I was traumatised. Before, I didn't know what was going on."
The effects of exploitation can last for years and many girls like Aliyah don't ever manage to escape it. But Aliyah did. "That home toned me down," she says. "I wasn't lost any more."
She left Bridges Lane with a new attitude. Then, aged 16, she discovered she was pregnant. It was a wake-up call. "I wasn't going to let my child experience even a quarter of what I went through," she says.
She knew she was still on the radar of social services and that her baby would be taken from her if she transgressed at all. She attended every single meeting she was called to, followed instructions to quit smoking and drinking.
Seven years ago, her daughter was born. It had been a hard pregnancy, but she believes the experience changed her life. "If it wasn't for her I wouldn't be here - she saved me," Aliyah says. "She's seven, and she experienced nothing I experienced when I was seven. And I thank the Lord every day for that." Today Aliyah lives with her daughter in what she describes as not just a house, but also a home.
They live a normal life - Aliyah works, she enjoys writing poetry and is about to embark on studies to become a social worker so that she can help children in the same way that Rowena helped her. "I'm still on a journey. My daughter is in my care. I'm a mum, I've got a home, not a house. I work. The community in the area that I live in, it smiles at me every day. I made it. And I'm in a better place."
Many of the people on the FBI's cyber most wanted list are Russian. While some allegedly work for the government earning a normal salary, others are accused of making a fortune from ransomware attacks and online theft. If they left Russia they'd be arrested - but at home they appear to be given free rein.
"We're wasting our time," I thought, as I watched a cat licking the carcass of a discarded takeaway chicken. Surely there would no longer be any trace of an alleged multi-millionaire cyber-criminal on this dilapidated estate in a run-down town 700km (400 miles) east of Moscow.
But I pressed on with an interpreter and cameraman, shooing the mangy cat away from the entrance to the block of flats. When we knocked at one of the doors, a young man answered and a curious elderly woman peered around the corner at us from the kitchen.
"Igor Turashev? No, I don't recognise the name," he said. "His family is registered here, so who are you?" we asked. After some friendly chat we explained we were reporters from the BBC, and the mood suddenly changed.
"I'm not telling you where he is and you shouldn't try to find him. You shouldn't have come here," the young man said angrily. I didn't sleep well that night, thinking of the conflicting advice I'd been given by people in the security sector.
Some said trying to track down wanted cyber-criminals on their home soil was risky. "They'll have armed guards," I was told. "You'll end up in a ditch somewhere," another warned. Others said it would be fine - "They're just computer geeks." All said we wouldn't get anywhere near them.
In a press conference two years ago, the FBI named nine members of the Russian hacking group, Evil Corp, accusing Igor Turashev and the gang's alleged leader, Maksim Yakubets, of stealing or extorting more than $100m in hacks affecting 40 different countries.
The victims range from small businesses to multinationals like Garmin, as well as charities and a school. They're just the ones we know about. Watch The Russian Hackers Wanted by the West on the iPlayer this weekend, and the BBC News Channel - click here for timings
The US Department of Justice says the men are "cyber-enabled bank robbers" staging ransomware attacks, or hacking into accounts to steal money. The announcement made Maksim Yakubets, then only 32, a poster boy for the playboy Russian hacker.
Maksim Yakubets drives a custom Lamborghini with the Russian word for "thief" on the licence plate
The FBI's indictment of the two men was the result of years of work, including interviews with former gang members and the use of cyber-forensics. Some information dated back as far as 2010, when Russian police were still prepared to collaborate with their US colleagues.
Those days are long gone now. The Russian government routinely brushes off US hacking accusations against its citizens. In fact, not only are the hackers allowed to carry on, they are recruited by the security services too.
This was the venue for his spectacular wedding in 2017, a video of which was spotted by Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and widely shared. Wedding planner Natalia wouldn't go into specifics about Yakubets' big day but showed us around some of the key locations, including a pillared building carved out of the hills near a lake.
As we were driven around by golf cart I did some maths. With what we were being told, this grand wedding would have cost considerably more than the estimates I'd heard previously of around $250,000. The price tag was potentially closer to half a million dollars, or even $600,000.
All have offices in Moscow's prestigious Federation Tower, a shiny skyscraper in the financial district that wouldn't look out of place in Manhattan or London's Canary Wharf. A puzzled receptionist looked for a phone number, and found that the offices didn't have one. She did find a mobile phone under the firm's name though, and put us through.
We called it and waited. A Frank Sinatra song played for about five minutes, then finally someone picked up, sounding as though he was on a busy street - only to hang up when we said we were journalists. As Andrey explained, Turashev is not wanted in Russia so no-one is stopping him renting this expensive city-centre office space.
It may also be convenient for him to be located among financial companies, including some that deal in the cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin, that Evil Corp is alleged to have collected from victims in ransomware attacks - reportedly $10m-worth in one case.
A Bloomberg report using research from Bitcoin analysts Chainalysis claims that the Federation Tower houses numerous crypto firms that act like "cash machines for cyber-criminals". We tried two other addresses linked to Turashev and another key Evil Corp figure called Denis Gusev, and made numerous approaches by phone and email, but no-one answered.
Andrey and I spent a long time trying to find a place of work for Maksim Yakubets. He used to be a director of his mother's cattle feed company, but these days he appears to have no registered business or employer.What we did find, though, were addresses where he might still live, so one night we went to give them a knock.
At one, a man laughed over the intercom as we explained where we were from.To our surprise Yakubets senior then came out into the hallway and gave us an impassioned 20-minute interview on camera, angrily condemning the US authorities for indicting his son.
The $5m US reward for information leading to his son's arrest - the highest ever bounty for a named cyber-criminal - had led the family to live in fear of attack, Mr Yakubets said, demanding that we publish his words.
"The Americans created a problem for my family, for many people who know us, for our relatives. What was the purpose? American justice has turned into Soviet justice. He was not questioned, he was not interrogated, there were no procedures that would prove his guilt."
He denied that his son was a cyber-criminal. When I asked how he thought he had become so rich, he laughed, saying that I was exaggerating the price tag of the wedding and that the luxury cars were rented. Maksim's salary was higher than average, he said, because "he works, he gets paid, he has a job".
More Russian people and organisations have been sanctioned and indicted than those of any other nationality. Indictments prevent the hackers from travelling abroad, while the sanctions freeze any assets they have in the West, and ban them from doing business with Western firms.
Last year the European Union started issuing cyber-sanctions, following in the US's footsteps, and it's mainly Russians who have been named and shamed on this list too.The Kremlin denies all accusations, routinely laughing them off as Western hysteria and "Russophobia".
The vast majority of the individuals on these lists are said to have direct links to the Russian state, hacking in order to spy, project power or exert pressure. While all nations hack each other, the US, EU and allies claim that some of the Russian attacks cross a line, in terms of what is acceptable.
Some of the men are accused of causing widespread blackouts in Ukraine by hacking power grids. Others are wanted for trying to hack into a chemical weapons testing facility in the wake of the Salisbury poisonings.
As there are no clear rules for what is acceptable nation state hacking, we deliberately concentrated our investigation on the individuals accused of being criminals, hacking for profit. An alleged member of Evil Corp holding wads of cash. So do cyber-sanctions against "criminal" hackers work?
Speaking to father it seems that they do have some impact - at the very least they made him furious. However Evil Corp appears to have been unaffected. Cyber-security researchers allege the crew are still carrying out lucrative cyber-attacks on mainly Western targets.
The "golden rule" of Russian hacking, according to researchers and former hackers, is that non-state-employed criminal hackers can hack who they like, as long as the victims are not in Russian-speaking or former Soviet territories.
The rule appears to work, as cyber-security researchers have for many years noticed fewer attacks in those countries. They've also found that some malware is designed to avoid computers with Russian language systems.
Lilia Yapparova, an investigative reporter working at Meduza, one of few independent news organisations in the country, says the golden rule is helpful for the intelligence services, which can then exploit the skills hackers have developed while working for themselves.
"It's more valuable for the FSB to enlist hackers in Russia than to put them in jail. One of my sources, who is an ex-FSB officer, told me that he personally tried to enlist some of the guys from Evil Corp to do some work for him," she says.
The US claims that Maksim Yakubets and other wanted hackers - including Evgeniy Bogachev, who has a $3m bounty out for his arrest - have worked directly for the intelligence services. It may not be a coincidence that Yakubets' father-in-law, seen in the wedding video, is a former high-level member of the FSB.
When Vladimir Putin was asked about this at the Geneva summit with Joe Biden this summer, he denied that high-profile attacks were originating in his country and even claimed that most cyber-attacks began in the US. But he said he would work with the US to "bring order".
2009: Evil Corp arrives on the scene, allegedly using malware called Cridex, Dridex, Bugat or Zeus to steal banking logins and grab money from accounts 2012: Members of Evil Corp are indicted by a court in Nebraska under their online monikers, as their identities are unknown (Yakubets allegedly goes under the name "Aqua")
2017: The crew is accused of starting a "ransomware as a service" (RaaS) operation - it's claimed other hackers pay to use their ransomware, called BitPaymer 2019: Yakubets, Turashev and seven others are indicted, sanctioned or designated in the US - a $5m bounty is offered for information leading to Yakubets' arrest
Since 2019, Evil Corp is alleged to have cycled through different brands and variants of ransomware including DoppelPaymer, Grief, WastedLocker, Hades, Phoenix and Macaw. In the last six months the US and its allies have gone beyond cyber-sanctions, and started employing a far more aggressive tactic.
They have begun hacking back against cyber-crime gangs and have successfully taken some of them offline, at least temporarily. REvil and DarkSide have announced on forums that they are no longer operating because of law enforcement action.
On two occasions US government hackers have even managed to retrieve millions of dollars of Bitcoin stolen from victims. An international effort involving Europol and the US Department of Justice has also seen alleged hackers arrested in South Korea, Kuwait, Romania and Ukraine.
However, cyber security researchers say more groups are surfacing, and attacks are occurring every week. The phenomenon will not go away, they say, as long as hackers can flourish in Russia.
It was on the corner of the street that he noticed the first sign of something peculiar -- a cat reading a map. For a second, Mr. Dursley didn't realize what he had seen -- then he jerked his head around to look again.
There was a tabby cat standing on the corner of Privet Drive, but there wasn't a map in sight. What could he have been thinking of? It must have been a trick of the light. Mr. Dursley blinked and stared at the cat. It stared back. As Mr. Dursley drove around the corner and up the road, he watched the cat in his mirror.
It was now reading the sign that said Privet Drive -- no, looking at the sign; cats couldn't read maps or signs. Mr. Dursley gave himself a little shake and put the cat out of his mind. As he drove toward town he thought of nothing except a large order of drills he was hoping to get that day.
But on the edge of town, drills were driven out of his mind by something else. As he sat in the usual morning traffic jam, he couldn't help noticing that there seemed to be a lot of strangely dressed people about.
People in cloaks. Mr. Dursley couldn't bear people who dressed in funny clothes -- the getups you saw on young people! He supposed this was some stupid new fashion. He drummed his fingers on the steering wheel and his eyes fell on a huddle of these weirdos standing quite close by.
They were whispering excitedly together. Mr. Dursley was enraged to see that a couple of them weren't young at all; why, that man had to be older than he was, and wearing an emerald-green cloak!
The nerve of him! But then it struck Mr. Dursley that this was probably some silly stunt -- these people were obviously collecting for something yes, that would be it. The traffic moved on and a few minutes later, Mr. Dursley arrived in the Grunnings parking lot, his mind back on drills.
Mr. Dursley always sat with his back to the window in his office on the ninth floor. If he hadn't, he might have found it harder to concentrate on drills that morning.
He didn't see the owls swooping past in broad daylight, though people down in the street did; they pointed and gazed open-mouthed as owl after owl sped overhead. Most of them had never seen an owl even at nighttime. Mr. Dursley, however, had a perfectly normal, owl-free morning. He yelled at five different people.
He made several important telephone calls and shouted a bit more. He was in a very good mood until lunchtime, when he thought he'd stretch his legs and walk across the road to buy himself a bun from the bakery.
He'd forgotten all about the people in cloaks until he passed a group of them next to the baker's. He eyed them angrily as he passed. He didn't know why, but they made him uneasy.
This bunch were whispering excitedly, too, and he couldn't see a single collecting tin. It was on his way back past them, clutching a large doughnut in a bag, that he caught a few words of what they were saying.
Mr. Dursley might have been drifting into an uneasy sleep, but the cat on the wall outside was showing no sign of sleepiness. It was sitting as still as a statue, its eyes fixed unblinkingly on the far corner of Privet Drive.
It didn't so much as quiver when a car door slammed on the next street, nor when two owls swooped overhead. In fact, it was nearly midnight before the cat moved at all.A man appeared on the corner the cat had been watching, appeared so suddenly and silently you'd have thought he'd just popped out of the ground. The cat's tail twitched and its eyes narrowed.
Nothing like this man had ever been seen on Privet Drive. He was tall, thin, and very old, judging by the silver of his hair and beard, which were both long enough to tuck into his belt. He was wearing long robes, a purple cloak that swept the ground, and high-heeled, buckled boots.
His blue eyes were light, bright, and sparkling behind half-moon spectacles and his nose was very long and crooked, as though it had been broken at least twice. This man's name was Albus Dumbledore.
Albus Dumbledore didn't seem to realize that he had just arrived in a street where everything from his name to his boots was unwelcome. He was busy rummaging in his cloak, looking for something.
But he did seem to realize he was being watched, because he looked up suddenly at the cat, which was still staring at him from the other end of the street. For some reason, the sight of the cat seemed to amuse him. He chuckled and muttered, "I should have known. "
He found what he was looking for in his inside pocket. It seemed to be a silver cigarette lighter. He flicked it open, held it up in the air, and clicked it. The nearest street lamp went out with a little pop. He clicked it again -- the next lamp flickered into darkness.
Twelve times he clicked the Put-Outer, until the only lights left on the whole street were two tiny pinpricks in the distance, which were the eyes of the cat watching him. If anyone looked out of their window now, even beady-eyed Mrs.
Dursley, they wouldn't be able to see anything that was happening down on the pavement. Dumbledore slipped the Put-Outer back inside his cloak and set off down the street toward number four, where he sat down on the wall next to the cat. He didn't look at it, but after a moment he spoke to it.
In years to come, Harry would never quite remember how he had managed to get through his exams when he half expected Voldemort to come bursting through the door at any moment. Yet the days crept by, and there could be no doubt that Fluffy was still alive and well behind the locked door.
It was sweltering hot, especially in the large classroom where they did their written papers. They had been given special, new quills for the exams, which had been bewitched with an Anticheating spell. They had practical exams as well.
Professor Flitwick called them one by one into his class to see if they could make a pineapple tapdance across a desk. Professor McGonagall watched them turn a mouse into a snuffbox -- points were given for how pretty the snuffbox was, but taken away if it had whiskers. Snape made them all nervous, breathing down their necks while they tried to remember how to make a Forgetfulness potion.
Harry did the best he could, trying to ignore the stabbing pains in his forehead, which had been bothering him ever since his trip into the forest. Neville thought Harry had a bad case of exam nerves because Harry couldn't sleep, but the truth was that Harry kept being woken by his old nightmare, except that it was now worse than ever because there was a hooded figure dripping blood in it.
Maybe it was because they hadn't seen what Harry had seen in the forest, or because they didn't have scars burning on their foreheads, but Ron and Hermione didn't seem as worried about the Stone as Harry. The idea of Voldemort certainly scared them, but he didn't keep visiting them in dreams, and they were so busy with their studying they didn't have much time to fret about what Snape or anyone else might be up to.
Their very last exam was History of Magic. One hour of answering questions about batty old wizards who'd invented selfstirring cauldrons and they'd be free, free for a whole wonderful week until their exam results came out. When the ghost of Professor Binns told them to put down their quills and roll up their parchment, Harry couldn't help cheering with the rest.
Harry's last month with the Dursleys wasn't fun. True, Dudley was now so scared of Harry he wouldn't stay in the same room, while Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon didn't shut Harry in his cupboard, force him to do anything, or shout at him -- in fact, they didn't speak to him at all.
Half terrified, half furious, they acted as though any chair with Harry in it were empty. Although this was an improvement in many ways, it did become a bit depressing after a while.
Harry kept to his room, with his new owl for company. He had decided to call her Hedwig, a name he had found in A History of Magic. His school books were very interesting. He lay on his bed reading late into the night, Hedwig swooping in and out of the open window as she pleased.
It was lucky that Aunt Petunia didn't come in to vacuum anymore, because Hedwig kept bringing back dead mice. Every night before he went to sleep, Harry ticked off another day on the piece of paper he had pinned to the wall, counting down to September the first.
On the last day of August he thought he'd better speak to his aunt and uncle about getting to King's Cross station the next day, so he went down to the living room where they were watching a quiz show on television. He cleared his throat to let them know he was there, and Dudley screamed and ran from the room.
Jack Crawford, fifty-three, reads in a wing chair by a low lamp in the bedroom of his home. He faces two double beds, both raised on blocks to hospital height. One is his own; in the other lies his wife, Bella. Crawford can hear her breathing through her mouth. It has been two days since she last could stir or speak to him.
She misses a breath. Crawford looks up from his book, over his half-glasses. He puts the book down. Bella breathes again, a flutter and then a full breath. He rises to put his hand on her, to take her blood pressure and her pulse. Over the months he has become expert with the blood pressure cuff.
Because he will not leave her at night, he has installed a bed for himself beside her. Because he reaches out to her in the dark, his bed is high, like hers. Except for the height of the beds and the minimal plumbing necessary for Bella’s comfort, Crawford has managed to keep this from looking like a sickroom.
There are flowers, but not too many. No pills are in sight—Crawford emptied a linen closet in the hall and filled it with her medicines and apparatus before he brought her home from the hospital. (It was the second time he had carried her across the threshold of that house, and the thought nearly unmanned him.)
A warm front has come up from the south. The windows are open and the Virginia air is soft and fresh. Small frogs peep to one another in the dark. The room is spotless, but the carpet has begun to nap—Crawford will not run the noisy vacuum cleaner in the room and uses a manual carpet sweeper that is not as good.
He pads to the closet and turns on the light. Two clipboards hang on the inside of the door. On one he notes Bella’s pulse and blood pressure. His figures and those of the day nurse alternate in a column that stretches over many yellow pages, many days and nights. On the other clipboard, the day-shift nurse has signed off Bella’s medication.
Crawford is capable of giving any medication she may need in the night. Following a nurse’s directions, he practiced injections on a lemon and then on his thighs before he brought her home.
Crawford stands over her for perhaps three minutes, looking down into her face. A lovely scarf of silk moiré covers her hair like a turban. She insisted on it, for as long as she could insist. Now he insists on it. He moistens her lips with glycerine and removes a speck from the corner of her eye with his broad thumb. She does not stir. It is not yet time to turn her.
At the mirror, Crawford assures himself that he is not sick, that he doesn’t have to go into the ground with her, that he himself is well. He catches himself doing this and it shames him. Back at his chair he cannot remember what he was reading. He feels the books beside him to find the one that is warm.
Starling felt pretty good. She knew Crawford was just giving her an exhausted mouse to bat around for practice. But he wanted to teach her. He wanted her to do well. For Starling, that beat courtesy every time. Raspail had been dead for eight years. What evidence could have lasted in a car that long?
She knew from family experience that, because automobiles depreciate so rapidly, an appellate court will let survivors sell a car before probate, the money going into escrow. It seemed unlikely that even an estate as tangled and disputed as Raspail’s would hold a car this long.
There was also the problem of time. Counting her lunch break, Starling had an hour and fifteen minutes a day free to use the telephone during business hours. She’d have to report to Crawford on Wednesday afternoon.
So she had a total of three hours and forty-five minutes to trace the car, spread over three days, if she used her study periods and made up the study at night. She had good notes from her Investigative Procedures classes, and she’d have a chance to ask general questions of her instructors.
During her Monday lunch, personnel at the Baltimore County Courthouse put Starling on hold and forgot her three times. During her study period she reached a friendly clerk at the courthouse, who pulled the probate records on the Raspail estate.
The clerk confirmed that permission had been granted for sale of an auto and gave Starling the make and serial number of the car, and the name of a subsequent owner off the title transfer.
On Tuesday, she wasted half her lunch hour trying to chase down that name. It cost her the rest of her lunch period to find out that the Maryland Department of Motor Vehicles is not equipped to trace a vehicle by serial number, only by registration number or current tag number.
On Tuesday afternoon, a downpour drove the trainees in from the firing range. In a conference room steamy with damp clothing and sweat, John Brigham, the ex-Marine firearms instructor, chose to test Starling’s hand strength in front of the class by seeing how many times she could pull the trigger on a Model 19 Smith & Wesson in sixty seconds.
She managed seventy-four with her left hand, puffed a strand of hair out of her eyes, and started over with her right while another student counted. She was in the Weaver stance, well braced, the front sight in sharp focus, the rear sight and her makeshift target properly blurred.
Midway through her minute, she let her mind wander to get it off the pain. The target on the wall came into focus. It was a certificate of appreciation from the Interstate Commerce enforcement division made out to her instructor, John Brigham.
Everett Yow drove a black Buick with a De Paul University sticker on the back window. His weight gave the Buick a slight list to the left as Clarice Starling followed him out of Baltimore in the rain. It was almost dark; Starling’s day as an investigator was nearly gone and she didn’t have another day to replace it. She dealt with her impatience, tapping the wheel in time with the wipers as the traffic crawled down Route 301.
Yow was intelligent, fat, and had a breathing problem. Starling guessed his age at sixty. So far he was accommodating. The lost day was not his fault; returning in the late afternoon from a week-long business trip to Chicago, the Baltimore lawyer had come directly from the airport to his office to meet Starling.
Raspail’s classic Packard had been stored since long before his death, Yow explained. It was unlicensed and never driven. Yow had seen it once, covered and in storage, to confirm its existence for the estate inventory he made shortly after his client’s murder.
If Investigator Starling would agree to “frankly disclose at once” anything she found that might be damaging to his late client’s interests, he would show her the automobile, he said. A warrant and the attendant stir would not be necessary.
Starling was enjoying the use for one day of an FBI motor pool Plymouth with a cellular telephone, and she had a new ID card provided by Crawford. It simply said FEDERAL INVESTIGATOR—and expired in a week, she noticed.
Their destination was Split City Mini-Storage, about four miles past the city limits. Creeping along with the traffic, Starling used her telephone to find out what she could about the storage facility. By the time she spotted the high orange sign, SPLIT CITY MINI-STORAGE—YOU KEEP THE KEY, she had learned a few facts.
Split City had an Interstate Commerce Commission freight-forwarder’s license, in the name of Bernard Gary. A federal grand jury had barely missed Gary for interstate transportation of stolen goods three years ago, and his license was up for review.
Yow turned in beneath the sign and showed his keys to a spotty young man in uniform at the gate. The gatekeeper logged their license numbers, opened up and beckoned impatiently, as though he had more important things to do.
Split City is a bleak place the wind blows through. Like the Sunday divorce flight from La Guardia to Juárez, it is a service industry to the mindless Brownian movement in our population; most of its business is storing the sundered chattels of divorce.
Its units are stacked with living room suites, breakfast ensembles, spotted mattresses, toys, and the photographs of things that didn’t work out. It is widely believed among Baltimore County sheriff’s officers that Split City also hides good and valuable consideration from the bankruptcy courts.
It resembles a military installation: thirty acres of long buildings divided by fire walls into units the size of a generous single garage, each with its roll-up overhead door. The rates are reasonable and some of the property has been there for years. Security is good. The place is surrounded by a double row of high hurricane fence, and dogs patrol between the fences twenty-four hours a day.
Six inches of sodden leaves, mixed with paper cups and small trash, had banked against the bottom of the door of Raspail’s storage unit, number 31. A hefty padlock secured each side of the door. The left-side hasp also had a seal on it. Everett Yow bent stiffly over the seal. Starling held the umbrella and a flashlight in the early dark.
“It doesn’t appear to have been opened since I was here five years ago,” he said. “You see the impression of my notary seal here in the plastic. I had no idea at the time that the relatives would be so contentious and would drag out the probate for so many years.” Yow held the flashlight and umbrella while Starling took a picture of the lock and seal.
“Mr. Raspail had an office-studio in the city, which I closed down to save the estate from paying rent,” he said. “I had the furnishings brought here and stored them with Raspail’s car and other things that were already here. We brought an upright piano, books and music, a bed, I think.”
Yow tried a key. “The locks may be frozen. At least this one’s very stiff.” It was hard for him to bend over and breathe at the same time. When he tried to squat, his knees creaked. She poked through her purse and found the de-icer spray she used on her Pinto’s door locks.
Starling was glad to see that the padlocks were big chrome American Standards. They looked formidable, but she knew she could pop the brass cylinders out easily with a sheet metal screw and a claw hammer—her father had showed her how burglars do it when she was a child. The problem would be finding the hammer and screw; she did not even have the benefit of the resident junk in her Pinto.
“Want to rest a second in your car, Mr. Yow? Why don’t you warm up for a few minutes and I’ll give this a try. Take the umbrella, it’s only a drizzle now.” The padlock jumped like a frog in her hand and lay there open, heavy and greasy. The other lock, having soaked, was easier.
Starling moved the FBI Plymouth up close to the door to use its headlights. She pulled the dipstick out of the car and dripped oil into the keyholes of the padlocks, then sprayed in de-icer to thin the oil. Mr. Yow smiled and nodded from his car. Starling was glad Yow was an intelligent man; she could perform her task without alienating him.
It was dark now. She felt exposed in the glare of the Plymouth’s headlights and the fan belt squealed in her ear as the car idled. She’d locked the car while it was running. Mr. Yow appeared to be harmless, but she saw no reason to take a chance on being mashed against the door.
The padlock jumped like a frog in her hand and lay there open, heavy and greasy. The other lock, having soaked, was easier.
The door would not come up. Starling lifted on the handle until bright spots danced before her eyes. Yow came to help, but between the small, inadequate door handle and his hernia, they exerted little additional force.
“I found it that way and I never uncovered it,” Yow called under the door. “I can’t deal with a dusty rug. That’s the way Raspail had it. I just made sure the car was there. My movers put the piano against the wall and covered it and stacked more boxes beside the car and left. I was paying them by the hour. The boxes are sheet music and books, mostly.”
The rug was thick and heavy and as she tugged at it, dust swarmed in the beam of her flashlight. She sneezed twice. Standing on tiptoe, she could fold the rug over to the midline of the tall old car. The curtains were drawn in the back windows. The door handle was covered with dust.
She had to lean forward over cartons to reach it. Touching only the end of the handle, she tried to turn it downward. Locked. There was no keyhole in the rear door. She’d have to move a lot of boxes to get to the front door, and there was damn little place to put them. She could see a small gap between the curtain and the post of the rear window.
Starling leaned over boxes to put her eye close to the glass and shined her light through the crack. She could only see her reflection until she cupped her hand on top of the light. A splinter of the beam, diffused by the dusty glass, moved across the seat. An album lay open on the seat. The colors were poor in the bad light, but she could see Valentines pasted on the pages. Lacy old Valentines, fluffy on the page.
“Thanks a lot, Dr. Lecter.” When she spoke, her breath stirred the fuzz of dust on the windowsill and fogged the glass. She didn’t want to wipe it, so she had to wait for it to clear. The light moved on, over a lap rug crumpled on the floor of the car and onto the dusty wink of a pair of man’s patent leather evening shoes. Above the shoes, black socks and above the socks were tuxedo trousers with legs in them.
Stand on 1st Avenue on the first Sunday of November, and you will see a lot of people. Thousands, actually. Some of those thousands will be right next to you, yelling, screaming, holding signs that are just huge, enormous faces, or signs that say touch this for power, or signs with Star Wars references — do this, you can.
Some will be clanging cowbells, banging pots and pans, waking up the people a few floors above who somehow managed to sleep through all the first, initial noise. The noise of another crowd waking up, stretching, brewing coffee, and then wandering out from their various apartments and homes, to find their way to Staten Island.
This year marked the first year I haven’t run the New York City Marathon since 2013. Actually, that’s a lie. I missed one year, 2015. I had been diagnosed with a stress fracture high up on my femur just a few weeks before the race. I was in the best shape ever.
When I got the diagnosis, I was so sad that I left the city, too bitter and dejected to watch thousands of others run my race. So, what I mean is that this year marked the first year I really, truly made an effort to spectate the New York City Marathon.
I have also been hurt this year, and underwent surgery on my knee nearly nine months before the marathon. Two months before, I was given the go-ahead to jog again, for just a few minutes at a time, a couple times a week.
There was no disenchantment or disillusionment when I woke up on Sunday, November 7th. I dwelled in those rooms months before, and had come to the long, laborious, and complex peace of not knowing exactly what my running future might look like, if it might look the same as it once did.
And besides, a couple of my friends were running, and my girlfriend, who loves spectating the marathon with an absolute fervor, wanted to show me how such spectating was done. I was ready to tag along.
When you consistently run and train for marathons, each race takes on this all-encompassing position in your mind. It looms in the distance, at first just a slight lump upon the horizon, but then, as you get closer, it becomes the mountain you have made of it in your imagination.
You scaffold up your training from months away, and then, a month out, the race dominates your psyche. You find yourself shaking your legs as you stand, bouncing up and down on your toes. You don’t want to think about time, but it’s all you can think about.
You enter, in essence, the tunnel vision that comes with any act that beckons your obsession. There’s a beauty to this, there really is. But there’s also any obsession’s drawback. When I have run a marathon and fallen off the pace I have wanted for myself, I’ve gone through long moments of absolute fog, forgetting the cheers alongside the road. I have felt, in those moments, so sorry for myself that I have forgotten that I am doing something I love.
And yet, when I found myself standing on 1st Avenue a few Sundays ago, clutching a thermos of coffee, waiting for the first runners to make it down the road, love was the overwhelming, collective sensation. For the city, for each other, for what we were about to witness. We were  about to celebrate something.
A couple stood next to my girlfriend and I — one of their children knee-high, clutching a small mixing bowl and a wooden spoon. The little boy banged one against the other as a DJ set up down the block and more people began to gather, holding homemade signs. Then the professional women ran by, and I almost cried.
To have the opportunity to watch anything phenomenal up close is a beautiful thing. There’s this desire for stillness, a longing to stop time, and dwell in the extended present moment of someone doing something transcendent. But then, it’s just a second or two later, and the moment is over. The runners are already gone.
One beautiful thing about the marathon, though, is that the runners keep coming. The small packs of professionals that run past — and the anxious energy that comes with waiting for them — are replaced by a steady stream of runners.
It reminded me of a moment from Colson Whitehead’s novel The Nickel Boys, where Whitehead’s protagonist talks about watching the marathon and loving those “who weren’t running the course but running deep into their character.”
Here in the city, as Whitehead writes, “Everybody was around and by some miracle you didn’t want to wring their neck but give them a hug.” I found my mouth open the whole time, screaming with just my throat at first and then, at my girlfriend’s urging, with my whole body.
Some runners had their names written on their singlets, or written on tape they then affixed to their chests, and I screamed those names. I screamed the names of the countries some people wore emblazoned on their shirts. I screamed beard when I saw a beard. I screamed amazing. I screamed wow. I screamed yes.
I was following along with the progress of two of my best friends, ones whom I had run with in college. When they came by, I hopped the fence that was no longer there and ran alongside them.
It wasn’t far but it was beautiful: to be running with my friends again, yes, but also to be an intimate spectator to their own act of endurance, to yell one of my friend’s names at the crowds and ask them to yell it back to him. They did. They always did. They yelled mustache at my friend’s mustache. He laughed and ached. We all did.
When I pulled off, I thought about how, years before, distraught through injury, I chose not to watch the marathon. I felt, at the time, obsessed with the idea of testing my own limits and measuring my own ability to set new limits.
I also measured my relationship to myself by my own ability to meet or exceed those measurements. I didn’t understand that such acts occur within a collective network, that there is a dependency to life, and that acknowledging such a dependency offers volumes of inherent value. What I mean is that, sometimes, watching feels just as beautiful as doing. And always, watching is its own kind of doing.
It was watching that allowed us to witness the people whose suffering formed these deep lines on their faces and the people smiling through their sweat and the people wearing not a single shirt and the people with shirts wrapped around their waists.
The people running and the people walking and the people running, then walking, then running again. People, always. Always people. Every so often, someone would spot a friend in the crowd and their friend would spot them and they’d yell and cry and hold their hands to their faces and hug and say oh my god or I can’t believe it or you’re doing this and then the hug would be released and the runner would go off again, on their journey.
I thought of the times I had run a marathon and chased a fast time, and how, when I eventually blew up, my pace slowing, my dominating thought was one of shame. I’d feel ashamed to be running slower than I had planned, and I assumed everyone knew that. But the truth is that no one knows, or cares.
When you’re caught up in that tunnel vision of your own obsession, you don’t see what’s really happening, which is nothing, really. You might be slowing down, but you’re still part of this beautiful celebration. There are tens of thousands of others, and you’re not alone — you’re with them.
If only I had offered myself more grace, I thought, while standing again on 1st Avenue, I would have had more fun. To escape the tunnel vision, to witness the world in all of its celebration and sorrow is also one way of understanding and maybe even forgiving ourselves.
In How to Do Nothing, Jenny Odell writes: “Perhaps the granularity of attention we achieve outward also extends inward, so that as the perceptual details of our environment unfold in surprising ways, so too do our own intricacies and contradictions.” And when we know ourselves as such contradictory, complex beings, ones who succeed and fail often in the same breath, we have an easier time joining in our own celebration.
And it’s that celebration that’s on display during a marathon. That joy. That deep, abiding sense of the collective that I wish extended long after the race ended and people resumed what we all resume each day: our ordinary lives.
As Colson Whitehead asks in his novel: “Who wouldn’t celebrate that?” I walked down 1st Avenue and saw shufflers and walkers and stop-and-starters. We yelled what names we saw, and gave high-fives. There were those who stared into the sky with absolute longing.
There were people, you could tell, who were holding the thought of something precious in their mind, who seemed to be running for something so pure and powerful that it might make their heart the size of an elephant if that were possible.
And there was one runner, I remember, who came up to us and pointed at my friend’s scarf. The temperature was dropping. It was starting to get dark. It’s a beautiful scarf, the runner said, and, without even hesitating, my friend took it off his neck and held it out for her. Do you want it, he said, and she said yes, and it was hers.
We are met, each day, with the various limits of our various individual existences. Maybe life is not about turning inward in the face of those challenges and trying to determine how we can each break those limits. No.
Maybe life is about turning outward to acknowledge each person’s daily act of trying in this collectively trying world. Maybe life is, in part, about celebration. The best part about spectating the marathon was that I could watch it for so long. It felt like forever.
I didn’t have to be caught up within the narrowed focus of my own vision and thought. The lens widened: there was so much happening, and so much of it was beautiful. And the worst part was that, when the race ended, and the last runners made their way down 1st Avenue, it ended so quickly.
Barricades were lifted. People shuffled back home. Cars rejoined the street. The next morning, there was only the faded blue line of the course to mark the fact that the marathon had happened. We offer ourselves these moments of pure, collective joy, and then we go back so quickly to being ourselves.
I wish it weren’t so. I think we often forget that witness is part of the beauty of being alive. I forget this all the time, caught up as I am in being myself. I’m still thinking about that scarf, though, the joy of watching such a small act of kindness. As I write this, it’s cold in New York. I wonder if that runner is still wearing it now.
He remembers being pressed between people so tightly that he couldn’t get his hands out of his pockets. He remembers the crash of the safety barrier collapsing behind him when his team nearly scored and the crowd surged.
Hundreds of people fell, toppled like dominoes by those pinned in next to them. Cowley was pulled under. He remembers waking up among the dead and dying, crushed beneath the weight of bodies.
He remembers the smell of urine and sweat, the sound of men crying. He remembers locking eyes with the man struggling next to him, then standing on him to save himself. He still wonders if that man was one of the 94 people who died that day.
These memories have tormented Cowley his whole adult life. For 30 years he suffered from flashbacks and insomnia. He had trouble working but was too ashamed to talk to his wife. He blocked out the worst of it by drinking. In 2004 one doctor referred him to a trainee therapist, but it didn’t help, and he dropped out after a couple of sessions.
But two years ago he spotted a poster advertising therapy over the internet, and he decided to give it another go. After dozens of regular sessions in which he and his therapist talked via text message, Cowley, now 49, is at last recovering from severe post-traumatic stress disorder.
“It’s amazing how a few words can change a life,” says Andrew Blackwell, chief scientific officer at Ieso, the UK-based mental health clinic treating Cowley.
What’s crucial is delivering the right words at the right time. Blackwell and his colleagues at Ieso are pioneering a new approach to mental-health care in which the language used in therapy sessions is analyzed by an AI.
The idea is to use natural-language processing (NLP) to identify which parts of a conversation between therapist and client—which types of utterance and exchange—seem to be most effective at treating different disorders.
The aim is to give therapists better insight into what they do, helping experienced therapists maintain a high standard of care and helping trainees improve. Amid a global shortfall in care, an automated form of quality control could be essential in helping clinics meet demand.
Ultimately, the approach may reveal exactly how psychotherapy works in the first place, something that clinicians and researchers are still largely in the dark about. A new understanding of therapy’s active ingredients could open the door to personalized mental-health care, allowing doctors to tailor psychiatric treatments to particular clients much as they do when prescribing drugs.
The success of therapy and counseling ultimately hinges on the words spoken between two people. Despite the fact that therapy has existed in its modern form for decades, there’s a surprising amount we still don’t know about how it works.
It’s generally deemed crucial for therapist and client to have a good rapport, but it can be tough to predict whether a particular technique, applied to a particular illness, will yield results or not. Compared with treatment for physical conditions, the quality of care for mental health is poor. Recovery rates have stagnated and in some cases worsened since treatments were developed.
Researchers have tried to study talking therapy for years to unlock the secrets of why some therapists get better results than others. It can be as much art as science, based on the experience and gut instinct of qualified therapists. It’s been virtually impossible to fully quantify what works and why—until now.
Zac Imel, who is a psychotherapy researcher at the University of Utah, remembers trying to analyze transcripts from therapy sessions by hand. “It takes forever, and the sample sizes are embarrassing,” he says. “And so we didn’t learn very much even over the decades we’ve been doing it.”
AI is changing that equation. The type of machine learning that carries out automatic translation can quickly analyze vast amounts of language. That gives researchers access to an endless, untapped source of data: the language therapists use.
Researchers believe they can use insights from that data to give therapy a long-overdue boost. The result could be that more people get better, and stay better.
Blackwell and his colleagues are not the only ones chasing this vision. A company in the US, called Lyssn, is developing similar tech. Lyssn was cofounded by Imel and CEO David Atkins, who studies psychology and machine learning at the University of Washington.
Both groups train their AIs on transcripts of therapy sessions. To train the NLP models, a few hundred transcripts are annotated by hand to highlight the role therapists’ and clients’ words are playing at that point in the session.
For example, a session might start with a therapist greeting a client and then move to discussing the clients’ mood. In a later exchange, the therapist might empathize with problems the client brings up and ask if the client practiced the skills introduced in the previous session. And so on.
The technology works in a similar way to a sentiment-analysis algorithm that can tell whether movie reviews are positive or negative, or a translation tool that learns to map between English and Chinese. But in this case, the AI translates from natural language into a kind of bar code or fingerprint of a therapy session that reveals the role played by different utterances.
A fingerprint for a session can show how much time was spent in constructive therapy versus general chitchat. Seeing this readout can help therapists focus more on the former in future sessions, says Stephen Freer, Ieso’s chief clinical officer, who oversees the clinic’s roughly 650 therapists.
The problems that both Ieso and Lyssn are addressing are urgent. Cowley’s story highlights two major shortcomings in the provision of mental-health care: access and quality. Cowley suffered for 15 years before being offered treatment, and the first time he tried it, in 2004, it didn’t help. It was another 15 years before he got treatment that worked.
Cowley’s experience is extreme, but not uncommon. Warnings of a looming mental-health crisis ignore a basic truth: we’re already in one. Despite slowly receding stigma, most of the people who need help for a mental-health issue still don’t get it. About one in five of us has a mental illness at any given time, yet 75% of mentally ill people aren’t receiving any form of care.
And of those who do, only around half can expect to recover. That’s in the best mental-health systems in the world, says Blackwell. “If we went to a hospital with a broken leg and we were told there was a 50-50 chance of it being fixed, somehow that wouldn’t seem acceptable,” he said in a TED talk last year. “I think we can challenge ourselves to have higher expectations.”
The pandemic has exacerbated the problem but didn't create it. The issue is fundamentally about supply and demand. The demand comes from us, our numbers swelled by one of the most taxing collective experiences in living memory. The problem on the supply side is a lack of good therapists.
This is what Ieso and Lyssn are addressing. According to Freer, people typically come at the supply problem with the assumption that you can have more therapists or better therapists, but not both.
“I think that’s a mistake,” he says. “I think what we’re seeing is you can have your cake and eat it.” In other words, Ieso thinks it can increase access to care and use AI to help manage its quality. Ieso is one of the largest providers backed by the UK’s National Health Service (NHS) that offer therapy over the internet by text or video.
Its therapists have so far delivered more than 460,000 of hours of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)—a commonly used and effective technique that helps people manage their problems by changing the way they think and behave—to around 86,000 clients, treating a range of conditions including mood and anxiety disorders, depression, and PTSD.
Ieso says its recovery rate across all disorders is 53%, compared with a national average of 51%. That difference sounds small—but with 1.6 million referrals for talking therapy in the UK every year, it represents tens of thousands of people who might otherwise still be ill. And the company believes it can do more.
Since 2013, Ieso has focused on depression and generalized anxiety disorder, and used data-driven techniques—of which NLP is a core part—to boost recovery rates for those conditions dramatically. According to Ieso, its recovery rate in 2021 for depression is 62%—compared to a national average of 50%—and 73% for generalized anxiety disorder—compared to a national average of 58%.
Ieso says it has focused on anxiety and depression partly because they are two of the most common conditions. But they also respond better to CBT than others, such as obsessive compulsive disorder. It’s not yet clear how far the clinic can extend its success, but it plans to start focusing on more conditions.
In theory, using AI to monitor quality frees up clinicians to see more clients because better therapy means fewer unproductive sessions, although Ieso has not yet studied the direct impact of NLP on the efficiency of care.
"Right now, with 1,000 hours of therapy time, we can treat somewhere between 80 and 90 clients,” says Freer. “We’re trying to move that needle and ask: Can you treat 200, 300, even 400 clients with the same amount of therapy hours?”
Unlike Ieso, Lyssn does not offer therapy itself. Instead, it provides its software to other clinics and universities, in the UK and the US, for quality control and training.
In the US, Lyssn’s clients include a telehealth opioid treatment program in California that wants to monitor the quality of care being given by its providers. The company is also working with the University of Pennsylvania to set up CBT therapists across Philadelphia with its technology.
In the UK, Lyssn is working with three organizations, including Trent Psychological Therapies Service, an independent clinic, which—like Ieso—is commissioned by the NHS to provide mental-health care. Trent PTS is still trialing the software. Because the NLP model was built in the US, the clinic had to work with Lyssn to make it recognize British regional accents.
Dean Repper, Trent PTS’s clinical services director, believes that the software could help therapists standardize best practices. “You’d think therapists who have been doing it for years would get the best outcomes,” he says. “But they don’t, necessarily.”
Repper compares it to driving: “When you learn to drive a car, you get taught to do a number of safe things,” he says. “But after a while you stop doing some of those safe things and maybe pick up speeding fines.”
The point of the AI is to improve human care, not replace it. The lack of quality mental-health care is not going to be resolved by short-term quick fixes. Addressing that problem will also require reducing stigma, increasing funding, and improving education.
Blackwell, in particular, dismisses many of the claims being made for AI. “There is a dangerous amount of hype,” he says. For example, there’s been a lot of buzz about things like chatbot therapists and round-the-clock monitoring by apps—often billed as Fitbits for the mind. But most of this tech falls somewhere between “years away” and “never going to happen.”
“It’s not about well-being apps and stuff like that,” says Blackwell. “Putting an app in someone’s hand that says it’s going to treat their depression probably serves only to inoculate them against seeking help.”
One problem with making psychotherapy more evidence-based, though, is that it means asking therapists and clients to open up their private conversations. Will therapists object to having their professional performance monitored in this way?
Repper anticipates some reluctance. “This technology represents a challenge for therapists,” he says. “It’s as if they’ve got someone else in the room for the first time, transcribing everything they say.”
To start with, Trent PTS is using Lyssn’s software only with trainees, who expect to be monitored. When those therapists qualify, Repper thinks, they may accept the monitoring because they are used to it. More experienced therapists may need to be convinced of its benefits.
The point is not to use the technology as a stick but as support, says Imel, who used to be a therapist himself. He thinks many will welcome the extra information. “It’s hard to be on your own with your clients,” he says. “When all you do is sit in a private room with another person for 20 or 30 hours a week, without getting feedback from colleagues, it can be really tough to improve.”
Freer agrees. At Ieso, therapists discuss the AI-generated feedback with their supervisors. The idea is to let therapists take control of their professional development, showing them what they’re good at—things that other therapists can learn from—and not so good at—things that they might want to work on.
Ieso and Lyssn are just starting down this path, but there’s clear potential for learning things about therapy that are revealed only by mining sufficiently large data sets. Atkins mentions a meta-analysis published in 2018 that pulled together around 1,000 hours’ worth of therapy without the help of AI. “Lyssn processes that in a day,” he says. New studies published by both Ieso and Lyssn analyze tens of thousands of sessions.
For example, in a paper published in JAMA Psychiatry in 2019, Ieso researchers described a deep-learning NLP model that was trained to categorize utterances from therapists in more than 90,000 hours of CBT sessions with around 14,000 clients.
The algorithm learned to discern whether different phrases and short sections of conversation were instances of specific types of CBT-based conversation—such as checking the client’s mood, setting and reviewing homework (where clients practice skills learned in a session), discussing methods of change, planning for the future, and so on—or talk not related to CBT, such as general chat.
The researchers showed that higher ratios of CBT talk correlate with better recovery rates, as measured by standard self-reported metrics used across the UK. They claim that their results provide validation for CBT as a treatment. CBT is widely considered effective already, but this study is one of the first large-scale experiments to back up that common assumption.
In a paper published this year, the Ieso team looked at clients’ utterances instead of therapists’. They found that more of what they call “change-talk active” responses (those that suggest a desire to change, such as “I don’t want to live like this anymore”) and “change-talk exploration” (evidence that the client is reflecting on ways to change) were associated with greater odds of reliable improvement and engagement.
Not seeing these types of statements could be a warning sign that the current course of therapy is not working. In practice, it could also be possible to study session transcripts for clues to what therapists say to elicit such behavior, and train other therapists to do the same.
This is valuable, says Jennifer Wild, a clinical psychologist at the University of Oxford. She thinks these studies help the field, making psychotherapy more evidence-based and justifying the way therapists are trained.
“One of the benefits of the findings is that when we’re training clinicians, we can now point to research that shows that the more you stick to protocol, the more you’re going to get symptom change,” says Wild. “You may feel like improvising, but you need to stick to the treatment, because we know it works and we know how it works. I think that’s the important thing—and I think that’s new.”
These AI techniques could also be used to help match prospective clients with therapists and work out which types of therapy will work best for an individual client, says Wild: “I think we’ll finally get more answers about which treatment techniques work best for which combinations of symptoms.”
This is just the start. A large health-care provider like Kaiser Permanente in California might offer 3 million therapy sessions a year, says Imel—“but they have no idea what happened in those sessions, and that seems like an awful waste.”
Consider, for example, that if a health-care provider treats 3 million people for heart disease, it knows how many got statins and whether or not they took them. “We can do population-level science on that,” he says. “I think we can start to do similar things in psychotherapy.”
Blackwell agrees. “We might actually be able to enter an era of precision medicine in psychology and psychiatry within the next five years,” he says. Ultimately, we may be able to mix and match treatments.
There are around 450 different types of psychotherapy that you can get your insurer to pay for in the US, says Blackwell. From the outside, you might think each was as good as another. “But if we did a kind of chemical analysis of therapy, I think we’d find that there are certain active ingredients, which probably come from a range of theoretical frameworks,” he says.
He imagines being able to pull together a selection of ingredients from different therapies for a specific client.“Those ingredients might form a whole new type of treatment that doesn’t yet have a name,” he says.
One intriguing possibility is to use the tools to look at what therapists with especially good results are doing, and teach others to do the same. Freer says that 10 to 15% of the therapists he works with “do something magical.”
“There’s something that they’re doing consistently, with large volumes of clients, where they get them well and the clients stay well,” he says. “Can you bottle it?”
Freer believes the person who treated Kevin Cowley is just that type of therapist. “That’s why I think Kevin’s story was such a powerful one,” he says. “Think of how many years he’s been suffering. Now imagine if Kevin had had access to care when he was 17 or 18.”
In the spring of her freshman year of high school, in 2011, Emma Burris was woken at three in the morning. Someone had turned on the lights in her room. She was facing the wall and saw a man’s shadow. She reached for her cell phone, which she kept under her pillow at night, but it wasn’t there.
The man, Shane Thompson, who is six and a half feet tall, wore a shirt with “Juvenile Transport Agent” printed on the back. He and a colleague instructed Emma to put on her clothes and follow them to their car. “She was very verbal, resisting,” Thompson told me. Her parents, who had adopted her when she was seven, stood by the doorway, watching silently.
Thompson drove Emma away from her house, in Royal Palm Beach, Florida, and merged onto the highway. Emma, who was fifteen, tried to remember every exit sign she passed, so that she could find her way home, but she was crying too hard to remember the names.
In his notes, Thompson wrote, “Emma voiced that she was confused as to why her mom was sending her away.” She was on the track, volleyball, and soccer teams, and she didn’t want to miss any games.
Part Scottish and part Puerto Rican, Emma was slight, with long, wavy blond hair. Her parents, whose lives revolved around their church, admonished her for being aggressive toward them and for expressing her sexuality too freely.
She watched lesbian pornography and had lost her virginity to an older boy. She often read romance novels late at night, when she was supposed to be asleep. To avoid attracting her parents’ attention, she used the light from the street to work on a novel that told a story similar to her own life: a young girl spends her early years in foster care, where she is abused, until a Christian family saves her.
To keep the ending upbeat, she found herself straying from the facts of her life. Emma worried that her parents, who had three biological children, considered her a burden. “There was always a sense of exile,” Emma said. Her mother sometimes told her, “If I have to love you from a distance, I will.”
After a three-hour drive, Thompson pulled up to a ranch house in Lakeland, a small city in central Florida. About thirty yards behind the house was a much larger one, with white shutters and a brick fence. Emma was escorted inside the second house and told to strip naked and bend over while she coughed, to prove she wasn’t hiding any drugs.
She was informed that this would be her new school. It was called Teen Challenge, and she would remain there for at least fifteen months. She was taken to her bedroom, which she would share with four other girls.
She noticed a streak of mascara on her pillow, which she took as a sign that the previous occupant had been crying. The room had no doors, and floodlights in the hallways remained on all night. If anyone opened a window, alarms sounded.
Teen Challenge, a network of nonprofits that has received tens of millions of dollars in state and federal grants, has more than a thousand centers in the United States and abroad. George W. Bush has praised it as “one of the really successful programs in America.”
The organization, which is affiliated with the Pentecostal Assemblies of God church, is made up of centers for adolescents and adults seeking to overcome “life-controlling issues,” such as drug use, depression, or sexual promiscuity. Many people are sent there by courts, as an alternative to juvenile detention or jail.
The school followed a Bible-based curriculum emphasizing character development, and a counsellor gave Emma a thick handbook. Touching was forbidden, she learned.
For her first six weeks, she would be a Little Sister. She had to stay six feet away from people, including staff. She was not allowed to speak, except to her two Big Sisters—students who had been in the program for at least six months—and she could not enter a room unless her Big Sisters accompanied her.
At church, she had to sit between them. The school was all girls, and contact with boys was prohibited. If she saw a boy at church, she had to look away. At one Teen Challenge, in Oklahoma, students told me, boys and men were called the Others.
The handbook warned against the act of “condoning”—the failure to report another student’s misbehavior. The staff often repeated a phrase from the Gospel of Luke: “Everything that is concealed will be brought to light and made known to all.”
When students break rules, they are often assigned “Character Qualities,” such as gratefulness or reverence. They must write over and over a paragraph summarizing the attribute, citing Scripture, up to a hundred and fifty times.
Another punishment, called Silence, outlaws communication among students, including “making gestures.” Depending on the center, this form of punishment is also known as Reflection or Talking Fast. Students given the discipline at some centers told me they had to wear ankle monitors or a yellow reflective vest.
As a Little Sister, Emma was put “on skirts”—she had to wear a knee-length skirt and flip-flops, to make it difficult to run away. Emma was informed that when girls ran away, or even spoke about the idea, their program was re-started, with two extra months added.
She signed a “Civil Rights Waiver,” agreeing that Teen Challenge “may call the local sheriff’s office and/or police department (hereafter ‘Third Party’) if I am being rebellious and non-cooperative and such Third Party may handcuff me and take me away to juvenile detention.” (Teen Challenge no longer puts people “on skirts” or uses this waiver.)
When Brittany Hotte, who arrived at the school three months before Emma, was told about her status as a Little Sister, she asked her Big Sisters, “Is this a cult?” She said they exchanged glances and laughed. “I guess this is kind of like a cult,” one responded.
Brittany’s parents had sent her to Teen Challenge after they discovered that she had been working at a brothel in Fort Lauderdale. Brittany, who was sixteen years old, quickly saw that the only way to move through the program was to conform.
“I wish sometimes that I could brainwash myself,” she wrote in her journal. “I’m tired of not being able to control my dreams. It’s hard enough to control my thoughts when I’m awake.”
It was clear to Brittany that Emma had a long way to go. “When she got there, she was loud and defiant, and she just did not want to follow the rules,” Brittany told me. “I remember thinking to myself, She does not get it. That’s not how this works.”
For a week, Emma felt sluggish and sick in the mornings. She asked her Big Sisters for permission to speak, and, when they agreed, she said she was worried that she was pregnant. Her period was two weeks late. They assured her that, owing to the stress of Teen Challenge, everyone’s menstrual cycle got off track.
“They just saw this little blond girl who has never done a drug in her life and looks like this sad little toy,” Emma said. “They were trained to believe that a Little Sister would lie.”
When you start writing professionally, namely about yourself, people don’t really tell you that putting that kind of work out into the world can feel dangerous. Dangerous to your sense of safety, dangerous to your sense of self, to your relationships, and perhaps even to any potential future career.
Write the wrong thing — and here, wrong can mean anything from merely obnoxious to cruel or racist or wildly incorrect or otherwise offensive — and it’s easy to be misunderstood, or eviscerated online, or fully canceled, whether for good reason or not.
This fear has only become exacerbated by constant online feedback. While literary backchannels have always shared negative book reviews, dreaded one-star Goodreads reviews now keep authors up at night, adding to that feeling that everyone can witness (and contribute to) your public failure.
Plus, no one likes being the center of a Twitter pile-on, even when it might be ultimately deserved. We’re all waiting for someone to tell us we’ve written something that failed — and we’re all anxious about how devastating the consequences might be.
Which is why, perhaps, the author Kathleen Hale has become a representative for a worst-case scenario of what can happen when someone writes something that has been deemed “wrong.” But Hale’s story is not just about a singular personal disaster — it also speaks to the nature of criticism today, so-called cancel culture, and the growing power of Goodreads, especially for emerging genre writers.
In January 2014, Hale was a 27-year-old freelance journalist and essayist, living in New York with one recently released YA book and a second under contract with HarperCollins. Her debut, No One Else Can Have You, was considered controversial for a book marketed to teenagers.
The dark comedy, which included references to murder and abuse, raised the ire of some reviewers online — including on Goodreads, an online community that has become a major driver of book publicity, where anyone can leave reviews of nearly any book.
Hale wasn’t a household name, and her book wasn’t tracking to be among the most popular YA books to be released that year, so she followed her publisher’s advice to be more online and spent the next few months writing a handful of pieces in hopes of getting her name out there. (She underestimated how well this would work — for all the wrong reasons.)
And then Hale did something that ruined her literary career before it ever really hit its stride. You’d be forgiven if you don’t remember the exact details of that particular five-year-old internet spiral. It began with an October 2014 Guardian essay about confronting an unfriendly Goodreads reviewer.
Blythe Harris, a then-influential book blogger and prolific reviewer on Goodreads wrote a one-star review for Hale’s book before it was released. “Fuck this,” the review said, according to Hale. (This particular review of her book no longer exists, beyond Hale’s description of it.) “I think this book is awfully written and offensive; its execution in regards to all aspects is horrible and honestly, nonexistent.”
But it wasn’t just that Harris didn’t like Hale’s book; it was that she was encouraging others to avoid it as well. “Other commenters joined in to say they’d been thinking of reading my book, but now wouldn’t,” Hale wrote in the Guardian essay that documented her obsession with Harris’s review.
“Blythe went on to warn other readers that I was a rape apologist and a slut shamer. She said my book mocked everything from domestic abuse to PTSD.” (In an updated version of the essay in her new collection, she adds, “She’d only read the first chapter, she explained, but wished Goodreads allowed users to leave scores of zero, because that’s what my novel deserved.”)
One scroll through Goodreads and you’ll see every author gets a bad review like this. No book is immune, not even the Bible. But something about this review in particular, this blogger, this critique made Hale unspool.
“The internet kind of drove me crazy in 2014,” Hale told me over the phone, in one of two interviews in late May. “I think that my experience is on a continuum of what normal people experience online. I think even the healthiest people are driven a little mad by the internet.”
Not only did Hale start digging into Harris’s social media presence, but once she discovered Blythe Harris was not who she said she was — according to Hale’s investigation, she was not using her real name and had taken photos from another woman’s Facebook page — she also paid for a background check to find out where she lived, aided by an unwitting assist by a book club who forwarded her Harris’s address after Hale said she wanted to do a Q&A with her.
Hale then rented a car and drove to what she believed was Harris’s house. She didn’t end up making physical contact, but called the person who lived at the residence, pretending to be a fact-checker in hopes of figuring out Harris’s real identity.
Hale felt that Harris’s assessment of her book wasn’t just hurtful, it was wrong. And worse, she was influencing other people away from her work, which not only had implications for the success of Hale’s debut but potentially whatever she wrote next.
In her Guardian essay, Hale laid it all out: “Blythe’s vitriol continued to create a ripple effect: every time someone admitted to having liked my book on Goodreads, they included a caveat that referenced her review. Writing for a living means working in an industry where one’s success or failure hinges on the subjective reactions of an audience.”
Hale went to great lengths to argue that both she and Harris were doing something wrong; that Harris’s anonymity as a critic and apparent campaign against a debut author was unfair, and that Hale, to use her own words, had clearly gone “nuts.” And while the Guardian piece doesn’t leave you feeling like Hale is a hero for simply doing what all writers secretly want to do, she doesn’t come off as a complete villain either.
The reaction to the piece was both predictable and outsize: Goodreads reviewers and book bloggers called for Hale’s head. “When an author stalks a reader, turns up at their doorstep unannounced, and calls them at work, it’s not because the reader deserved it,” wrote one blogger.
“It’s because the author decided that their need to control how a reader reacts to them and their work gives them the right to violate the reader’s privacy and threaten their sense of security.” Hale said Goodreads banned her because of what happened between her and Harris.
Goodreads declined to comment on the particulars of Hale’s situation, saying in an email, “While we don’t share details about any specific moderation, our goal is for Goodreads to be a welcoming place for all of our 90 million members to express their diverse, personal opinions about books.”
Hale was repeatedly called a stalker, and not in the tongue-in-cheek way she might have intended. Harris seemingly left the internet forever, which only further fueled the internet’s rage, particularly among the YA community members who considered her a digital friend and valued voice online.
On Twitter, #HaleNo trended internationally, and continues to be used by people angry with Hale’s presence in the book world. A few influential people did wade in to tweet in support of Hale, including comic John Mulaney and the writers Anne Rice, Robin Wasserman, and Frank Rich (who is now Hale’s father-in-law).
Hale was also doxed: People sent her Google Maps photos of her mother’s home, so she could experience how Harris might have felt being pursued by Hale.
“My phone was buzzing with threatening messages from strangers every five minutes or so for two and a half straight months until I just completely disconnected from everything,” Hale told me. “The real-life effects of that little uproar around me — my little internet scandal — were that my career in young adult literature was finished.”
The sequel to her debut, Nothing Bad Is Going to Happen, was released in 2016 to little fanfare and almost no promotion. According to Hale, her book editors said they “weren’t sure how to market a young adult novel … without bloggers.”
On Goodreads, the book was again panned with an overwhelming majority of one-star reviews, many of which were written before the book was even out, encouraging others to avoid reading it altogether.
In the five years since Hale originally wrote her Guardian essay, she’s been offline in a big way. No Twitter presence. Private Facebook. Private Instagram. A few essays a year.
Since the controversy, she’s also pivoted to reporting (she’s recently written for Hazlitt, GQ, and Vice) and she said she’s been writing for Netflix, Marvel, Hulu, and HBO. (In our interviews, Hale wouldn’t specify which shows she was writing for.)
But Hale has now decided to reemerge into the literary world with her first collection of essays, aptly titled Kathleen Hale Is a Crazy Stalker. The book, published earlier this month by Grove Press, comprises six previously published essays and includes an updated version of her Guardian piece, now called “Catfish.”
And while Hale spends a few paragraphs talking about the aftermath of publishing the piece, it’s no mea culpa. “I’ve never been the perfect victim — the girl who starts off weak and becomes unwaveringly strong,” Hale writes in the collection’s second essay, “Prey.”
The reactions to the new collection have been predictably apoplectic. Goodreads reviews for the book have been horrible and many bloggers have called for the book’s publication to be canceled. But you don’t need to tell Hale that what she did five years ago was wrong.
“Anyone who reads [“Catfish”] knows that I’m not proud of myself, I’m not bragging. I acted crazy. It’s a self-excoriating essay,” she told me. “What’s at the heart of all this is that I almost rang another woman’s doorbell. But I didn’t. I almost rang her doorbell and I think that really, really frightens people.”
If you’re not an author, it might be tough to understand the hold that Goodreads can have over your self-esteem. Goodreads, founded in 2011 and acquired by book sales juggernaut Amazon six years ago, can truly make or break your book, especially in genres like YA, fantasy, or romance.
The site has helped remove a lot of the gatekeepers that have kept the book industry from changing; a New York Times review is wonderful to get, but you no longer need it to make it big. “Literary criticism is still very elitist, very old, white, and male,” said Kayleigh Donaldson
Goodreads also has very real commercial impact. With its 90 million members, digital word of mouth can push book sales in a significant way. (Author Celeste Ng specifically credits Goodreads for helping her second novel, Little Fires Everywhere, debut on the New York Times bestseller list.)
The site does book giveaways, hosts Ask the Author features, drives early reviews through advance reader copies, and has its own list of Best Books of the year. Google a book, and the Goodreads page for it will likely be prominent among the top results.
But since there aren’t any gatekeepers stopping anyone from giving their two cents about a book, Goodreads can be a frustrating experience for authors. People are free to review books they haven’t read or refuse to read.
(That’s what’s currently what’s happening with Hale’s new book, which has an average 1.22 stars out of 5.) It means that The Catcher in the Rye has a bunch of one-star reviews because “Salinger tried just too damn hard to make [Holden] ‘universal.’”
It means “Dickens is a jerk” counts just as much as any other review for Great Expectations. (This isn’t to say any of these reviews are wrong; plenty of classic books are actually just white nonsense. But it is, at least, probably not the review that Charles Dickens might have expected when he wrote the book in 1861.)
My own essay collection came out in 2017 and I still have a lexiconic knowledge of all the bad reviews I received. Every negative or lukewarm review has made me mad, and forced me to get off my computer and do a few laps around the block until I could get back to work.
Plus, I’ve also had people get a little hot with me on the internet, and that anger has had tangible consequences. Last summer, someone got ahold of my personal cellphone number and called me repeatedly at all hours of the day and night, using various numbers impossible to block, asking if I was “that Indian bitch from BuzzFeed.” So, look, I get it.
And after two conversations with Katheen Hale, it’s clear that she still feels wronged, not just by Blythe Harris specifically, but by a culture that accommodates anonymous vitriol. “If anonymity is important because it offers protection, then who are we protecting?” she asked me during our first conversation.
“People were really taken aback by my essay because I was exploring the ways in which face-to-face interaction, non-anonymous interaction of any kind in modern society, has become increasingly and inherently confrontational or aggressive.”
Critique comes with being an author — and critique about personal writing can feel particularly weaponized, since that writing is fundamentally intimate and revealing. But you also have the option of not putting yourself through all this, again and again.
“I feel like I’d need to go to school for psychology for a long time to explain it, but I wrote a book about myself, and I am also private,” she said. “As writers, we’re driven to write. Part of the writing process is sharing the writing with an audience. I don’t think it necessarily means we enjoy being in the public eye at all.”
Now 32, Hale lives in Los Angeles with her husband, the TV writer and humorist Simon Rich, and their 2-year-old daughter in an internet teetotaler's dream. Their home is far enough in the hills that she has no cell service, and she said they can’t put in a landline because their phone would become a receptor for the Spanish-language radio station they live close to.
When we spoke, one of the first questions I asked was how the Guardian essay came to be, especially because Hale couldn’t have been naive to the fact she would undoubtedly get blowback when it went live. She told me she initially spoke with Melissa Denes, an editor at the Guardian, when Denes asked to republish an essay called “Prey” about her sexual assault that originally appeared in Hazlitt.
“Prey” is also one of the chapters in Kathleen Hale Is a Crazy Stalker. (I should acknowledge here that I was an employee at Hazlitt when “Prey” was published, though I was not her editor.) Hale sent her a pitch about Goodreads and the response to her first book.
“I don’t think she started off knowing exactly where it would end or if she would find anything out,” Denes told me in an interview in early June. “I think in the end, she says herself, this is the biggest breach of decency I’ve ever pulled. All the way through, she’s saying, why am I doing this, asking her friends, asking experts, why am I compelled to follow the bad news about myself?”
According to Hale, Denes told her to expect some pushback: “I remember an email from my editor at the Guardian saying are you ready for these book bloggers to get upset. I was prepared for them to get upset but I was not prepared for it to become so newsworthy,” Hale told me.
“It was a surprise to me that someone like me, I'm really a nobody, nobody knows who I am. When I wrote that article, I was making $12,000 a year on my writing before taxes. The fact that an article I had written for the Guardian generated five years of news — it's pretty insane.”
"When I wrote that article, I was making $12,000 a year on my writing before taxes. The fact that an article I had written for the Guardian generated five years of news — it's pretty insane.” The response to Hale’s piece was disproportionate in a way that male writers rarely experience. “I felt there was a streak of misogyny in some of the negative responses,” Denes told me in an email after our call.
“There’s a rich tradition of male writers and broadcasters (Michael Moore, Louis Theroux, Jon Ronson) tracking their subjects down, and they tend to be seen as bold, interesting, gonzo — Hunter S. Thompson figures.”
That may be true, but there’s no clear answer on why Hale decided to restart the controversy five years later. In fairness, it’s never easy to give a clean answer to your own complicated personal and career motivations. I have to assume that at least part of what compels her is probably what propels most essayists who willingly self-flagellate (myself included) for an ungrateful audience: She just can’t help herself.
In a coda to the updated Guardian piece in her new book, Hale writes about how in the aftermath of the article people told her to kill herself and sent her emails with her mother’s home address to prove some twisted point that they, too, could play at Hale’s game.
“One night I changed the passwords on all my various devices and started sawing at my wrist with a serrated knife,” she writes in the book. “When I seemed to run out of space on one wrist, I switched to the other. But then the bloody crosshatching didn’t match. The two wrists seemed uneven. So I tried to even them out.”
After her self-harming, Hale spent two weeks at a psychiatric hospital. “It took me five years to write those two pages,” Hale told me. “That’s probably all I’ll ever write about it because it’s interesting only as the coda to that particular story. It’s just a boring and difficult time.”
Though she and her publisher stand behind the collection, Hale has done remarkably little press, book touring, or any kind of marketing blitz for Kathleen Hale Is a Crazy Stalker. Reviews in traditional outlets, what few there are, have been lackluster: “The essays don’t work as well together thematically as she perhaps hopes they do,” wrote Kirkus, and the New York Times isn’t much better.
“It’s gutsy to portray oneself as messy and mean, but to what end?” Maris Kreizman writes in her review. “Radical honesty and self-deprecation don’t make up for a startling lack of empathy.”
But just because Hale isn’t garnering the same kind of attention as your average literary sensation doesn’t mean people aren’t still fixated on her. “Giving off Kathleen Hale vibes” is now a kind of shorthand for some reviewers to describe an author too fixated on their criticisms.
Users on Goodreads are still holding on to their anger, and reviews on the site have been particularly brutal. “I’m not even going to bother reading this book because a stalker of a reviewer SHOULD NOT have a book deal to cash out on this shit!” wrote one reviewer in January.
“Fuck this book and fuck the publisher who is putting it out in the world!” wrote another. Plenty more tagged the book as “will-never-read” or “no-way-in-hell.” Hell hath no fury like book bloggers scorned.
“I'm not allowed to exist on Goodreads, and to be clear, just so I'm not quoted out of context, I don't mean that literally,” Hale said. “I mean the reaction to this article that I wrote, people find it so terrifying that I almost knocked on someone's door using publicly available information that they think I shouldn't be allowed to have a job or work. And I think that says a lot about where we are as a culture.”
"I knew that people were going to be upset that I had been allowed to publish anything, much less a collection that included this one controversial essay.” But for all the anxiety that Hale feels about her personal safety, her actions made a lot of reviewers and bloggers feel similarly afraid.
“There was an entire website called Stop the Goodreads Bullies, which was basically doxing people on Goodreads and positioning them all as these massive abusers and bullies while putting their personal information on the internet,” Donaldson said. (The site is no longer up.)
Keeping Hale from profiting off anything related to her Guardian essay — and perhaps receiving retribution for driving Harris off Goodreads and the internet, and against “bad” author behavior in general — seems to be what a lot of reviewers and bloggers want.
“It’s the specific banking and profiting off this instance that sticks in a lot of people’s throats,” said Donaldson. “When you bring back that narrative, almost five years since it originally happened, I think that’s when people start questioning the motives.
Why now? Did you think enough time had passed that people have forgotten, that [they] think of it now as a joke, as something we can all have a laugh about?”
I asked Hale more than once why she would republish this particular essay, but my questions were mostly brushed off, beyond the fact that it was Grove’s suggestion to publish a collection of Hale’s essays. “People think that I expanded this essay into a book,” Hale told me.
“No. It's one of six essays and I write about lots of things in the essay — and altogether, it's a meditation on the internet and obsession and animals and being a woman and stuff like that.” But what about the title, which seems designed to rile people up and remind them of the essay that caused her such distress in the first place?
“There's nothing else to call it. I knew that people were going to be upset that I had been allowed to publish anything, much less a collection that included this one controversial essay which is one of six essays.”
But Hale, ultimately, is her own worst enemy, the reason she got into this mess to begin with. Her return to the literary world is neither a bombastic refusal to apologize nor a self-effacing apology and plea to be let back into the room. We may be living in the era of weak apologies, but Hale just isn’t that sorry.
I have written about the alt-right, Trump supporters, and how dumb movies are, and nothing has made me more nervous than writing about Goodreads, book bloggers, and Hale. I’m a published author with friends in the publishing industry, and I have personal relationships with other writers to maintain.
No writer with any aspirations to write books wants to piss off an influential community whose respect you not only want, but need for commercial success. Nor do I, frankly, want to piss off Hale, whose influential family includes a successful humor writer husband, a television producer father-in-law, and a HarperCollins executive editor mother-in-law.
Hale, through her publicist, refused to answer any questions about her family, namely whether they helped or hindered her return to publishing. It’s inside baseball, sure, but it’s real: Writing much of anything about this could put me in an awkward position, with possible retribution from either side.
While working on this story, I also found it remarkably difficult to find sources who would talk to me. HarperCollins, Hale’s first publisher, refused to comment. Hale’s editor, Peter Blackstock, initially agreed to an email interview, only to ignore most of my questions, instead telling me, in part, that “Grove is excited to be publishing Kathleen and we encourage people to read the six essays and make up their own minds.”
Former editors of Hale’s did not respond to requests for comment, nor did a handful of book bloggers who had previously written about Hale. Hale only agreed to speak to me if the critics quoted in the piece were willing to publish their real names. Remarkably few people answered my repeated requests for comment, even people who had, in the past, written about Hale and the controversy surrounding her initial essay.
It’s hard to blame anyone for their reticence. Twitter, Goodreads, and other book blogs are necessary places for people to talk about books. But they can also be toxic and cloistered.
At the beginning of the year, YA Twitter drove an up-and-coming author to cancel the publication of her own book after the book was accused of being racist. (The author ended up reversing her position, and Blood Heir is expected this November. So far, it has an impressive 4.20 on Goodreads.)
The Black Witch by Laurie Forest initially tanked after Goodreads reviewers accused her book of being offensive and dangerous. In her Vulture piece on the toxic YA book scene, Kat Rosenfield wrote about the challenges of even reporting on the topic.
“Rumors quickly spread that I had threatened or harassed [book blogger Shauna] Sinyard; several influential authors instructed their followers not to speak to me; and one librarian and member of the Newbery Award committee tweeted at Vulture nearly a dozen times accusing them of enabling
Even more complicated is that Hale seems much more fragile over the phone than she comes off in her writing. She’s blustery and confident when she writes, but in our conversations I could feel her anxiety radiating over the phone.
I know it took a lot for Hale to talk to me — she hasn’t spoken to any journalists about her Goodreads ordeal — and the coda to “Catfish” points to all the stress she had to manage after the Guardian piece went live.
“Writing about somebody else’s life is always an act of betrayal,” she told me at one point, about her own reporting on other people. It’s apt, because as I write about her, I feel like I’m betraying her.
But the prose in “Catfish” betrays only a sliver of self-awareness. She still talks as if everyone is out to get her for reasons that are entirely unclear. “I think our conception of trolls is that they’re men on 4chan who say sexist things about women.
That’s kind of a sexist assumption because of course trolls can also be women,” Hale said. “These anonymous female trolls happen to be like a book club, and what they do in order to troll people is they weaponize the language of social justice so that there’s no way to argue with them. They can very easily turn around and say that they’re being victimized.”
Hale is a conventionally attractive white woman from a privileged family in America, not exactly an obvious target for online persecution by, overwhelmingly, other white women.
Especially on Twitter, women, people of color, non-binary people, and otherwise marginalized communities are disporportionately harassed by anonymous trolls, who in turn experience little to no real consequences for their actions. Hale’s “troll,” as she refers to Harris, didn’t contact her directly to harass her. She simply didn’t like her book, and said so on a public forum made for readers, not writers.
After our first interview, Hale emailed me asking to clarify some things in a second call. She had also recorded our interview, and said that after listening back to it, she wanted to add a few thoughts.
I agreed, and we set up a time and date, but 20 minutes before we were scheduled to talk, her publicist got in touch to cancel the interview. Later, he sent me a statement from Hale as a Word document. “I’m excited about the book I’m working on now and happy to be able to continue writing,” it said in part.
“I wouldn’t have gotten here if I hadn’t been publicly shamed online. If that hadn’t happened, I wouldn’t have had to switch careers, which has ultimately been really enriching.”
Eventually, I got her on the phone, but only with her publicist’s supervision, a frustrating level of clearance to have to go through in order to speak to an author who is trying to promote a new book. Her reticence is odd given that she chose to publish this book. No one forced her to do it. And no one forced her to include that essay from five years ago that nearly ruined her life.
“The idea of being on the record and answering questions in real time is very nerve-wracking — especially given the nature of most of your questions, which revolve around an essay I wrote five years ago and people have been fixated on ever since,” she told me.
The jurors listened to Bourgoyne say she was sitting in the passenger seat of a car her husband was driving, on a November day nearly seven years earlier, when the couple stopped at a red light near a highway exit in New Orleans. Bourgoyne noticed three men chatting by a curb outside an Exxon Station, their motorcycles parked nearby. All of a sudden, a fourth man came up behind them, Bourgoyne said. He raised his hand and fired a gun. “The man in the middle fell over,” she told the jury.
In the courtroom, the prosecutor asked Bourgoyne if she saw the shooter, who ran off after the killing. “He’s the gentleman sitting in the white-and-black plaid shirt over at that table,” she said, shaking with emotion and pointing to the defendant, Michael Shannon. Bourgoyne said she picked Shannon’s photo out of a lineup nearly six months after the murder. She was “a hundred percent sure” she had the right man.
But Morrison, who worked as a teacher, was surprised to hear Bourgoyne, who was in her 60s, say she’d seen the shooter for only 15 to 20 seconds — and to hear that she told a prosecutor after the murder that she hadn’t been wearing her glasses. Morrison thought about whether she’d be able to identify a person she’d seen briefly, from inside a car, six months after the fact. She was 34 and had perfect vision. It seemed like a stretch.
On cross-examination, Bourgoyne admitted that she told the police the shooter was about six feet tall and stocky, with a neck like a football player. When Shannon stood up, Morrison saw that he was at least six inches shorter, at 5 foot 6, and slight of build. It mattered to her too that Shannon was black and Bourgoyne was white. (Research shows that it’s harder for witnesses to identify people of a different race.)
Morrison wanted to hear from other eyewitnesses to the killing.Earlier in the trial, the homicide detective who investigated the shooting testified that he’d interviewed the two men standing next to the victim, a 46-year-old named Ralph Cole, and four additional people who were nearby when the shooting took place. But when Bourgoyne finished testifying, the prosecution rested. Shannon’s lawyer called no witnesses. The trial ended after only about five hours.
On her way to deliberate with the other jurors, Morrison thought they would easily agree: There wasn’t enough proof to send Michael Shannon to prison. But in the room, Morrison says, the foreman, who was white, took charge and argued strongly for a guilty verdict. As Morrison remembers it, the conversation veered from the facts of the case to the spike in crime in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina.
The storm hit the city in August 2005, nine months after Cole’s murder, and its only bearing on the trial was the yearslong delay the storm caused. But as the jurors ­talked about Ralph Cole’s killing — his mother had described him working three jobs and raising a 6-year-old son with his wife — they began bringing up other crime victims they knew, as if they were somehow relevant to the guilt or innocence of Michael Shannon. (Other jurors couldn’t remember specific details or couldn’t be reached.)
When Morrison expressed her doubts about Bourgoyne’s identification of Shannon, an African-American woman on the jury agreed that the evidence was not strong enough, according to Morrison. But a second black woman was “adamant about Shannon’s guilt,” Morrison told me, remembering her saying, “If the prosecutor said he should be off the streets, then we needed to put him away.’’ Morrison continued, ‘‘I felt like they were bringing in these outside frustrations without looking much at the facts of this particular case.”
After about half an hour of deliberation, Morrison recalled, the foreman went around the table. Ten members of the jury agreed to find Shannon guilty of second-degree murder. Morrison and her ally stood their ground. In almost any other state, the jurors would have continued to deliberate. If they truly couldn’t agree, the case would have ended in a mistrial, because only a unanimous jury would have the power to convict.
When the judge praised the two prosecutors for “one of the quickest homicide cases I’ve had,” Morrison felt a surge of anger. Afterward, whenever she drove by the corner where Ralph Cole was killed, she was haunted by the photographs she’d seen of his body lying on the ground. From time to time, she also thought about how thwarted she felt in the jury room.
Last October, the Supreme Court heard arguments about whether split verdicts like the one in Shannon’s case violate the Constitution, and its decision is expected in the coming weeks or months. If the justices end the practice, they will finally close a chapter in American jurisprudence, in which two states — because of laws based in discrimination — have for decades been allowed to disregard a fundamental premise of our legal system.
A result, for some defendants like Shannon, has been years behind bars for crimes they didn’t commit. And for jurors like Morrison, forced to stand by as convictions take place over their serious objections, a result has been a feeling of powerlessness — as if justice had been denied not merely to the defendants but, in a sense, to them too.
Matthew Prince and Michelle Zatlyn, cofounders of the San Francisco internet security firm Cloudflare, stood on a slim marble balcony overlooking the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. A cluster of the company's executives stood near Prince, ready to shout out a countdown. “Louder! Loud!” Prince urged them.
“Five! Four! Three! …” At 9:30 am sharp, the founders reached down to ring the exchange's famous bell, kicking off the day's trading and offering their 10-year-old company on the public market. It was a rite of passage and also their payday, a moment that unlocked many millions of dollars in newfound wealth.
More than 100 employees and investors cheered from the trading floor below, their phones held high to capture the scene. Kristin Holloway, employee number 11, looked up at the balcony and snapped photos, then popped them into a text to her husband, Lee Holloway, the company's third cofounder. He was home in California. Every so often, a familiar face pushed through the throng to say to her, “Lee should be here.”
In Cloudflare's early years, Lee Holloway had been the resident genius, the guy who could focus for hours, code pouring from his fingertips while death metal blasted in his headphones.
He was the master architect whose vision had guided what began as a literal sketch on a napkin into a tech giant with some 1,200 employees and 83,000 paying customers. He laid the groundwork for a system that now handles more than 10 percent of all internet requests and blocks billions of cyberthreats per day. Much of the architecture he dreamed up is still in place.
But some years before the IPO, his behavior began to change. He lost interest in his projects and coworkers. He stopped paying attention in meetings. His colleagues noticed he was growing increasingly rigid and belligerent, resisting others' ideas, and ignoring their feedback.
Lee's rudeness perplexed his old friends. He had built his life around Cloudflare, once vowing to not cut his hair until the startup's web traffic surpassed that of Yahoo. (It took a few short months, or about 4 inches of hair.) He had always been easygoing, happy to mentor his colleagues or hang out over lunch. At a birthday party for Zatlyn, he enchanted some children, regaling them with stories about the joys of coding. The idea of Lee picking fights simply didn't compute.
He was becoming erratic in other ways too. Some of his colleagues were surprised when Lee separated from his first wife and soon after paired up with a coworker. They figured his enormous success and wealth must have gone to his head. “All of us were just thinking he made a bunch of money, married his new girl,” Prince says. “He kind of reassessed his life and had just become a jerk.”
The people close to Lee felt tossed aside. They thought he'd chosen to shed his old life. In fact, it was anything but a choice. Over the next few years, Lee's personality would warp and twist even more, until he became almost unrecognizable to the people who knew him best. Rooting out the cause took years of detective work—and forced his family to confront the trickiest questions of selfhood.
On the floor of the stock exchange that September morning, Lee's younger brother Alaric weathered the morning in a state of low-grade panic. He snapped selfies with early employees and fired them off in texts to his brother. Alaric had never worked at Cloudflare, and he knew barely anyone there. But his dark hair flopped over his forehead with the same distinctive swoop as his brother's, and his long, tapering face had the same dark eyes and olive skin. “It was surreal,” Alaric says. “People kept looking at me like they knew me.”
At home with his parents in San Jose, Lee, 38, was restless. He paced the rooms and hallways of the 1,550-square-foot house, a loop he'd been tracing since he'd moved in with them two years earlier. He didn't speak. His parents had the TV on, and they called him over whenever Prince or Zatlyn appeared onscreen.
Countless philosophers have taken a swing at this elusive piñata. In the 17th century, John Locke pinned selfhood on memory, using recollections as the thread connecting a person's past with their present. That holds some intuitive appeal: Memory, after all, is how most of us register our continued existence. But memory is unreliable.
Writing in the 1970s, renowned philosopher Derek Parfit recast Locke's idea to argue that personhood emerges from a more complex view of psychological connectedness across time. He suggested that a host of mental phenomena—memories, intentions, beliefs, and so on—forge chains that bind us to our past selves.
A person today has many of the same psychological states as that person a day ago. Yesterday's human enjoys similar overlap with an individual of two days prior. Each memory or belief is a chain that stretches back through time, holding a person together in the face of inevitable flux.
The gist, then, is that someone is “himself” because countless mental artifacts stay firm from one day to the next, anchoring that person's character over time. It's a less crisp definition than the old idea of a soul, offering no firm threshold where selfhood breaks down.
It doesn't pinpoint, for example, how many psychological chains you can lose before you stop being yourself. Neuroscience also offers only a partial answer to the question of what makes you you.
Neural networks encode our mental artifacts, which together form the foundation of behavior. A stimulus enters the brain, and electrochemical signals swoosh through your neurons, culminating in an action: Hug a friend. Sit and brood. Tilt your head up at the sun and smile. Losing some brain cells here or there is no big deal; the networks are resilient enough to keep a person's behaviors and sense of self consistent.
From an early age, he was a person who could visualize sprawling structures in his mind. Growing up in the 1990s in Cupertino, where his dad worked at Apple, Lee had early access to the latest computers, and he and his brother grew up bingeing on videogames. As a gamer, he was legendary among his friends for being able to read a complex situation, rapidly adjust strategies, and win match after match.
And it wasn't just videogames. His childhood friend Justin Powell remembers Lee strolling into a middle school chess club tournament cold. He wasn't a member of the club, but he won the tournament anyway. Lee avoided becoming insufferable by channeling his wit into snarky commentary. “Watching a movie with him was like a version of Mystery Science Theater 3000,” Powell says. “His very presence challenged you to keep up with him.”
Lee and his friends would cart their computers to each other's houses to play games together. He became curious about the machines themselves and started learning computer science, first in high school, then at a local community college and UC Santa Cruz, where an unlikely set of circumstances connected him with Matthew Prince.
Then a young entrepreneur, Prince was pursuing an idea for an antispam software tool when he encountered Arthur Keller, a UC Santa Cruz computer science professor. Keller and his students had already worked out a very similar concept.
Prince and Keller agreed to share a patent, along with Keller's students. One of those students was Lee, and Prince hired him on the spot. “I had no idea this school project would turn into something much bigger,” Lee later said in a video interview with a group called Founderly.
Prince set up the company, Unspam Technologies, in Park City, Utah, about a mile from a cluster of slopes where he could indulge his passion for skiing. Lee moved into Prince's basement, at first working for free in exchange for food and housing.
But Lee and the other Unspam engineers grew restless, and they started spinning up side projects, including one called Project Honey Pot, which tracked spammers as they crawled the web. That's all it did—it collected and published data on spammers, but it didn't do anything to stop them. Still, the project quickly amassed a loyal following.
In 2007, Prince left Utah to start business school at Harvard, and Lee moved to California to live with his girlfriend, Alexandra Carey. They'd known each other as undergrads, when she was a teaching assistant in his computer architecture class. Lee had goofed off in that class, once pranking the professor by scrawling childish notes on the transparencies of an overhead projector.
Alexandra had been amused, but it wasn't until after college that a relationship bloomed. Living in different cities, they fell for each other while playing and chatting within a multiplayer videogame called Savage. Now, with Prince leaving Utah, it seemed a natural time for Lee to join Alexandra. They married in 2008.
Lee and Prince kept working at Unspam from their respective cities, but as Prince was wrapping up business school, Lee called to tell him he was considering other job offers. Prince countered with a new and rather audacious pitch: He and a classmate, Michelle Zatlyn, had hit on a startup idea they thought had potential. What if they expanded Project Honey Pot to not just recognize spammers and hackers but also fight back against them?
The plan was to build out massive networks of servers around the world, convince website owners to route their traffic through those servers, and gather enough data to detect malicious requests amid the good ones. That might give them the tools they needed to stop even the world's biggest denial of service attack. But Prince needed a technical cofounder, and his about-to-defect employee was his top choice.
Prince talked for an hour straight. At the end of this spiel, Lee's side of the line was quiet. “I was like, ‘Are you still on the phone?’ ” Prince recalls. “Then he said, ‘Yeah, that'll work, let's do that.’ ” And that was it.
They whipped together a demo and in late 2009 raised a little over $2 million from two venture capital firms. It was enough to rent a converted two-bedroom apartment above a nail salon in Palo Alto, where they could start building their idea in earnest.
Lee would show up every day wearing the same Calvin Klein jeans, leather jacket, and beanie on his head, and lugging a giant ThinkPad laptop nicknamed the Beast. “We had this shared vision,” Zatlyn says. “And Lee was the architect behind it. He just obsessed over it.”
The following year, Prince talked his way into TechCrunch Disrupt, an onstage competition for startups that can lead to big funding rounds. As Disrupt approached, Prince and Zatlyn grew nervous. Lee had missed a lot of days of work due to migraines. He didn't seem anywhere close to finishing a demo. When the day of the event arrived, Prince and Zatlyn walked onstage praying that the software they were presenting would actually work.
Prince started his pitch. “I'm Matthew Prince, this is Michelle Zatlyn, Lee Holloway is in the back of the room. We're the three cofounders of Cloudflare,” he boomed, stabbing the air with his finger as he spoke. In fact, Lee was backstage furiously fixing a long list of bugs.
Prince held his breath when he ran the software, and, perhaps miraculously, it worked. It really worked. In the hour after he walked onstage, Cloudflare got 1,000 new customers, doubling in size.
They earned second place at Disrupt. “In the next couple of weeks, all these somewhat mythical VCs that we'd heard of and read about all called us,” Prince says. Under the onslaught of attention, Prince, Holloway, and one early hire, Sri Rao, rolled out constant fixes to hold the system together. “We launched in September, and in a month we had 10,000 websites on us,” Lee said in the Founderly interview. “If I'd known, we would have had eight data centers instead of five.”
With customers now multiplying, Ian Pye, another early engineer, hollowed out a toaster, tucked an Arduino board inside, and hooked it up to the network. Whenever a website signed up for Cloudflare services, the toaster sang a computerized tune Pye had composed. “It was horribly insecure,” Pye says. “But what were they going to do, hack our toaster?” The toaster lasted two weeks before the singing became too frequent and annoying and they unplugged it.
Cloudflare was growing fast, and Lee worked long days, often from home in Santa Cruz. He and Alexandra now had an infant son. During the first few months of the baby's life, Lee and Alexandra still made time to play videogames together. Alexandra remembers cracking up when Lee co-opted a nursing pillow to support his neck while he sat at his computer.
Several of his old friends came over once a week to play the board game version of Game of Thrones or the multiplayer videogame Team Fortress 2. Alexandra focused on childcare, but she made sure the players had food. “I was doing it for him,” she says.
But around 2011 she started noticing that Lee was growing distant and forming some odd new habits. He spent a lot more time asleep, for one. After long workdays, she recalls, he'd walk in the door, take off his shoes, and immediately pass out on the floor. Their cat sometimes curled up and napped on his chest. His son, not yet 2, would clamber over him, trying and failing to rouse him to play.
When people invited them to parties, Lee refused to go. Alexandra started attending her friends' weddings by herself. It hurt her to see everyone else there as a couple, while the chair next to her sat empty. At home she'd cook dinner, and he'd look at it and say he was ordering pizza. On a weeklong family trip to France, he spent three days sleeping in the hotel room.
“I'd say, ‘What's going on, we're going to these places—are you coming?’ ” Alexandra says. He'd insist he was too tired. She was finishing up a master's degree and shouldering the bulk of childcare; she, too, was tired. Alexandra begged him to go to therapy and cajoled him to play with their son, but he didn't engage. “After a while you think, well, this is the person I'm with,” she says.
In 2012, Alexandra told him she was taking an internship in Southern California, at NASA, and she was planning to take their son with her. She says his response was to calmly ask her to file for divorce before she left. “I was crushed. I said, ‘Maybe it doesn't have to be that way,’ ” she recalls. “He said, ‘No, no, it does.’ ”
When Lee told Prince and Zatlyn about his divorce, they both expressed their shock and gave their condolences, but Lee seemed to barely acknowledge the change. Prince and Zatlyn found his behavior tremendously odd. Still, they could rationalize it away. Relationships end for many reasons. Alexandra and Lee had married young, and both had worked long hours; perhaps they had grown apart. Besides, Lee was thriving at the company, so they didn't press.
Alexandra moved away, Lee was sitting at a table with a couple of coworkers, including Kristin Tarr, who ran communications at Cloudflare. She'd just published a blog post describing how customers could enable two-factor authentication on their accounts. He turned to her and said, “I read your blog post. It was really good.” A friend saw the interaction and teased her: Lee's flirting with you!
Lee and Kristin started spending time together. On one of their first dates, Lee took her to see his favorite metal band, the Swedish group Opeth. He revved up her interest in basketball, and they became Golden State Warriors junkies, watching every game. Kristin brought her own interests and energy into the relationship.
She convinced him to trade in his old jeans-and-leather-jacket uniform for nicer shirts from Rag & Bone. He still wore beanies and hoodies, but now they came from Lululemon, where Kristin, a running freak, had a weekend gig as a brand ambassador.
Sometimes he refused to get out of bed or retreated with a migraine; Kristin responded by signing him up for 5K races and coaxing him into training for them. Their coworkers marveled that their lead engineer had become so athletic.
Within a few months they had moved in together. She whisked him off on adventures, pulling him away from his computer and his videogames. They went tubing on the Truckee River. They played endless rounds of Bang! and Settlers of Catan with board-game-loving coworkers. Both nearsighted, they pretended they were moles, snuggled up in their burrow of a home.
As their fortunes grew, they upgraded their digs, moving from Mole Hole to Mole Tower to Mole Terrace. They gave their friends animal identities too; Prince was a mongoose, while another executive was a swan. In May 2014, Kristin quit Cloudflare, and the next day they left for a vacation in Italy. They got engaged in Rome.
At work, Lee was still the star engineer. At the end of the summer of 2014, he took on a project that earned Cloudflare its first bout of internet fame: The company would help websites become encrypted for free. (It was not yet standard for company websites to be encrypted.)
Lee agreed to build the necessary software by the end of September. As the date approached, Prince asked for updates, but Lee blew him off. Then, on the day before the new system was supposed to go live, he pulled his hoodie down low on his head, put on his headphones, and sat down to bang out the code.
It was a Sunday, but the office was packed with people writing up the pending announcement or delivering coffee and food. Lee's coding, though, was the main event. “And he is typing, typing, and I don't think anyone dared to interrupt,” says John Graham-Cumming, then an engineer and now Cloudflare's chief technology officer. “His hoodie is on, he's in the zone, he's doing brain surgery on this thing.”
Then, late in the night, Lee stood up. He announced that he'd finished, and he wandered away. “It was like, bzhzhzhzh, type-type-type, ‘I'm done!’” Graham-Cumming says.
The other engineers immediately started reviewing his code. By the morning, the debugging process began for real. The gambit worked, and all of their existing customers suddenly got encryption. It was a proud moment. Says Graham-Cumming: “The size of the encrypted web doubled overnight.”
Kristin planned their wedding, he decided to address a health problem he'd long ignored. Lee had been born with a heart issue, a leaky aortic valve, and some doctors thought it might be contributing to his migraines. “If you put your head on his chest, you could hear it,” Kristin says. “We called it his squishy heart.”
Doctors were split on how serious his condition was, but in January 2015 a surgeon at Stanford insisted he get surgery right away. Lee went in for the six-hour procedure. As he lay on his hospital bed, he recorded a video to his son: “I love you! I'll see you soon with a brand-new heart.” He signed off with a smile and a wave.
Kristin now sees the surgery as a grim turning point. Lee's heart came out of the procedure stronger than ever, but mentally he never seemed to recover. He slept all the time. He'd taken a leave from work to have the surgery, but he extended his leave by a month, and then another, until he finally returned to the office in the late spring.
In June they got married, in Hawaii, in front of a crowd of friends and family. Kristin noticed that he seemed subdued. It was as if someone had washed the color out of his personality. Prince noticed too but chalked it up to a slow recovery from the surgery.
Not long after, Lee and Kristin took a trip to Europe, spending a few days in France, just as Lee and Alexandra had years earlier. Kristin had never been to Paris, and she was excited to explore the city. She ended up doing that on her own, while Lee again spent days asleep in their hotel room. “This is so weird,” Kristin remembers thinking.
On their trip to Italy, he'd been eager to jump out of bed and visit museums and cafés, and walk around. She was puzzled, but between his migraines and his heart issue, there was always an explanation at hand.
At the office, he was becoming impossible to work with. He would lash out at people, and then in meetings he would zone out, openly playing games on his phone. During one meeting, Prince texted him: “Are you playing a game? People are noticing.” Then: “Not a great leadership signal.”
Prince and Zatlyn confronted him about his behavior, and Lee promised to do better. But his responses seemed rote. “I was like, why is he so disengaged? Why doesn't he seem to care?” Zatlyn recalls. They figured he must be burned out.
Still, it hurt; it felt as if Lee was breaking up with them. She'd paid attention to the stories of startup founders who split up, the mess of their breakups sometimes dragging their companies down with them. “So I'm thinking, well, I guess that's what that feels like.”
They put their friend on an official performance-improvement plan. Over many weekly lunches, Zatlyn and Prince tried to get through to him. Nothing seemed to stick. “For several years,” Prince says, “the thing that was causing me just incredible anxiety was that I had all this loyalty to this person, but they're becoming a jerk.”
Eventually, in 2016, they decided Lee had to leave the company. “He kind of just said, yup, that sounds about right,” Prince says. They threw him a going-away party that July. Prince thanked him in a speech with tears streaming down his cheeks. Lee stood beside him with a beer in hand, a thin smile on his face.
NOW THAT HE wasn't working, Lee napped constantly. Kristin was seven months pregnant, and they agreed that after the baby's birth, Lee would be a stay-at-home dad, at least until he figured out what to do next. In the meantime, they would live off their savings and Kristin's salary from a new job at an ad tech firm.
Lee's actions, however, only grew more bizarre. He watched Home Alone several nights a week. He wore his beanie all day, every day, pulling it lower and lower. When Kristin went into labor, he slept through most of the two-day ordeal, first slumbering at home and then resuming his nap at the hospital.
When he woke up, he insisted, against Kristin's wishes, that she not get an epidural, which provoked a heated argument with one of the doctors. After their son was born, Kristin's mom says the doctor pulled her aside and commented that she'd never seen an expectant dad react that way. Kristin confronted him about his behavior later, and he promised her, “I'll do better.”
In those heady first months of parenthood, he failed. He took copious naps. Sometimes she'd cook him dinner, and he'd reject it and order a burrito. “I was like, what is happening?” Kristin says. “Everything felt so strange and out of control.”
Distraught at his lack of interest in their son, she decided to stage a moment of parenting normalcy. If she couldn't coax him into engaging with their child, she'd settle for its illusion.
While Lee lay on the couch, she handed him the infant and grabbed her phone to record the scene. “You're standing, and you're so cute!” he coos as he props up the baby on his chest. “You're smiling and making a sound!” He dotes on his baby for less than a minute before handing him back to Kristin.
She kept trying to probe what was on his mind, and he kept replying, “I'll do better.” The repetitiveness of his answers struck her as robotic. It seemed of a piece with the way he now touched every tree he passed on their walks. “I think deep down I knew something was wrong,” Kristin says.
She thought maybe he'd developed PTSD after the surgery or was struggling with a bout of depression. She'd been asking him to see a counselor with her. Finally, as she prepared to return to work, she threatened to leave him if he didn't. Lee agreed.
In the couples' therapy session, Kristin cried openly and talked about how her husband didn't seem to care about their new baby. “Lee was just blank,” she recalls, and she wondered why he wasn't reaching out to comfort her. Suddenly he stood up, announced he'd forgotten to return the therapist's office bathroom key, and wandered out of the room to put it back, returning a few minutes later.
When her maternity leave came to an end, Kristin hired a nanny and went back to work, but her alarm was mounting. She started booking appointments with every specialist she could think of while Lee spent his days in bed. “So I'm cajoling him out of bed, getting him into the car, making sure my son is out with his nanny, covering my own work somehow,” and then shuttling him from appointment to appointment. “It was like that for three months.”
In mid-March of 2017, Kristin and Lee went to a neurologist to get the results of an MRI. To Kristin, it seemed that the neurologist had initially been skeptical of her concerns. Lee was young, healthy, and communicative.
The MRI told a different story: There was atrophy in the brain inconsistent with the age of the patient, the neurologist reported to them. When Kristin asked her what that meant, she said Lee had a neurodegenerative disease of some kind, but they'd need to do more tests to get a specific diagnosis. One of their doctors suggested they go to the Memory and Aging Center at UC San Francisco.
That evening, Kristin started Googling. She pulled up the website of the Memory and Aging Center and started reading the descriptions of brain atrophy diseases. She knew immediately the neurologist was right. And in that moment she glimpsed the future: This was going to kill her husband.
She remembers sitting with her son that night. “Until that point, I'd held out hope. We have the resources, the best doctors, I can fly him to get him the best care,” she says. “But to be in this position where nothing can be done is just … It's so awful.” She quit her job the next day.
A few weeks later, Kristin and Lee, their parents, and Alaric all gathered in a conference room on the UCSF campus with a panel of experts. “Do you know why you're here?” the lead neurologist asked Lee. He replied, “My wife organized this.”
The neurologists delivered their verdict: He appeared to have a textbook case of frontotemporal dementia—known by the shorthand FTD—specifically, the behavioral variant of that disease. It targets a network of brain regions sometimes described as underpinning one's sense of self. As the pathological process advanced, it was carving a different person out of Lee's raw substance.
It is a rare disease, affecting roughly one in 5,000 people, though many of the neurologists who study it believe it is underdiagnosed. What is known is that for people under the age of 60, it is the most common form of dementia. Still, as a man in his thirties, Lee was unusually young to be afflicted.
For some patients, one of several genetic mutations turns out to be the likely cause, and a subset of patients have a family history of neurodegenerative diseases. But nothing in the neurologists' investigations turned up even a hint as to why Lee had been struck down.
Regardless of cause, the prognosis is grim. There's no treatment. Lee's doctors warned that his symptoms would grow worse, and that over time he would likely stop talking, become immobile, and struggle to swallow, until eventually an infection or injury would likely turn fatal. The best the doctors could recommend was eating a balanced diet and getting exercise.
The family sat stunned at the neurologist's words. The brain scans were undeniable. On a wall-mounted screen the doctors showed a cross-section of the four lobes of Lee's brain. In a healthy brain, the familiar, loopy folds of tissue appear white or gray and push up against the edges of the cranium, filling every available space. Lee's brain looked nothing like that.
Black voids pocked his frontal lobe, areas where brain tissue had gone dead. Seeing it, Kristin gasped. “There were huge dark spots in his brain,” Alaric says. “That's what … that made it concrete.”
Lee received his death sentence with pure calm. While his family cried beside him, he complimented a doctor for having a nice wedding ring. At that, Alaric looked at him and realized for the first time the depths of his brother's transformation.
It takes all the things that define a person—hobbies and interests, the desire to connect with others, everyday habits—and shreds them. Over time, the disease transforms its victims into someone unrecognizable, a person with all the same memories but an alarming new set of behaviors. Then it hollows them out and shaves away their mobility, language, and recollections.
Because it is relatively unknown and can resemble Alzheimer's or a psychiatric disorder, FTD is often hard to diagnose. As in Lee's case, the early stages can be misinterpreted as signs of nothing more serious than a midlife crisis.
Patients can spend years shuttling to marriage counselors, human resources departments, therapists, and psychologists. By the time patients learn the name of their disorder, they are often unable to grasp the gravity of their situation.
Depending on where in the brain the disease first strikes, the symptoms can be jarring. Some sufferers become deeply religious, undergo wild shifts in political identity, or have a sharp change in interests or style of dress. One stockbroker, for example, started wearing all-lavender clothes and developed a sudden obsession with painting. As his disease progressed, he engaged in petty theft and swam nude in public pools.
The loss of embarrassment is common among some FTD patients, leading them to act in ways that might have horrified their former selves. Urinating in public, shoplifting, running red lights, making inappropriate sexual advances, digging through trash cans for food—all can be symptoms.
Patients can lose the ability to evaluate social situations too, making them hard to interact with. In one extreme case, a patient's wife nearly severed her finger while using a pair of borrowed gardening shears. She shrieked to her husband, who had FTD, that she needed to go to the hospital. He replied by saying they had to first return the shears to their neighbor.
These behaviors all arise because neurons are dying off in the frontal and temporal lobes, two large areas of the brain. Particularly vulnerable within these broad continents is a dispersed set of regions known as the salience network, which sifts through a barrage of sensations, memories, and emotions to focus a person's attention on what matters most in that moment.
When this network breaks down, people may fail to grasp the emotional impact of their actions on others. “Emotions drive most choices in life, so if you don't have those systems, you're not the same person,” says Virginia Sturm, a neuropsychologist and neuroscientist at UCSF. “There are no tight anchors to your sense of self anymore, and the boundaries of self become loose.”
In the months after Lee's diagnosis, Kristin spent as much time with her husband as she could. His decline had been steady so far, and she realized he would only slip further away. They spent the summer of 2017 going on long walks together. They took family trips.
She found herself scrutinizing every interaction: Was that his last joke? His last laugh? His last hug? She never knew. He started leaving the apartment without saying anything, and she'd have to grab the baby and chase him down San Francisco's busy streets.
Lee was quickly becoming unmanageable. Once the baby learned to crawl, Kristin installed a gate at the top of the stairs to keep him from falling down the steps. But whenever Lee walked past the gate, he'd reach down and unlatch it.
He started blasting music videos in the living room at 11 o'clock at night, despite the small child asleep in an adjacent room. Sometimes he'd stay up all night, walking around in circles. Kristin struggled to take care of her son while making sure her husband didn't duck out the door unnoticed.
She and Lee's parents grew increasingly worried he could get lost or mugged or wander into traffic. His parents, who are in their sixties, volunteered to take over Lee's care, and in the fall of 2017, Kristin agreed it was time for him to move in with them in San Jose while they figured out a long-term plan. “It's too hard to keep him safe in San Francisco,” his father, Rendon Holloway, says. “He has to have his walks.” Kristin was working full-time in San Francisco; she and their son stayed behind. Lee would visit them a few days a month.
Kristin and their son spent many of their weekends in San Jose. In the first year, his mother, Kathy Holloway, recalls, when Lee saw the two of them arrive, “he always ran to his bedroom and grabbed his suitcase.” He would say, “I want to go back to San Francisco.”
Lee often tried to leave the house. His parents eventually added an alarm that chimed loudly whenever the front door opened. They hid his shoes. He'd hunt for them, and if he found them he'd lace up and bolt out the door.
When he wasn't trying to escape, Lee settled into a rhythm of scrolling through family photos on his phone, playing Mario Kart, or watching YouTube videos, all in roughly 30-second spurts. Then he'd pace heavily around the house, loud footfalls thudding at all hours of the day. Kathy lined the floors with rubber mats to deaden the sound.
As the months passed, he spoke less and less. In one video from July 2018, Lee has his arm wrapped around his son while he reads him a bedtime book. Lee mumbles the words unevenly, without inflection, and hurries through the paperboard pages.
From behind her phone's camera lens, Kristin saw that this might be the last bedtime story he read their son. Still, she kept recording, and she ended it with a “Good job!” to them both.
Conversations soon became impossible. Lee started chattering in repetitive, unceasing loops. He would tell Kristin: “We met at Cloudflare. We got engaged in Rome. We got married in Maui, Hawaii.” He repeated it hundreds of times a day. Then the loops got shorter, more cryptic. He spoke fewer sentences, instead muttering sequences of numbers or letters.
He was both present and absent, a combination that kept his family on edge. When I visited his parents' house in April 2019, Kristin and Alaric were also there for the day. We were clustered in the front hallway while his mother slipped into the kitchen to make tea. Lee, dressed in a Henley shirt and sweatpants, emerged from the back of the house.
He stood tall and silent, and his arms hung heavily at his sides. He looked at Kristin, expressionless, as she introduced me and explained I'd come to write a story about his life. He turned to wander into the living room and kitchen, where he leaned his elbows on the counter and reached a hand out to his mother, wordlessly requesting a snack. Then Kristin and Alaric went out with him for a walk, while I sat down with his parents.
As we sat in the family's living room, Kathy described caring for her son, even as he grew increasingly distant. She misses the warmth in their daily interactions. “He used to come give me a hug and say, ‘I love you, Mom,’ ” she says. “No more.”
Kathy is not the only one struggling to accept Lee for who he is—whoever he is. Managing his decline has strained the family, and his relatives sometimes clash over who should take care of him and how he should live. Kristin has spent many hours in therapy working through her grief and her feelings of guilt over deciding to live apart from Lee.
She says she has felt alone in their relationship for years, and she's determined to give her son a relatively normal childhood. Alexandra, Lee's first wife, wonders whether her marriage fell apart because of the disease or their incompatibility. Was Lee simply someone who could sleep through European vacations and reject a homemade meal, or were those early incidents symptoms?
There's no way to know for sure. Who was he then? Who is he now? How tightly knit is any person's selfhood across time? The philosopher Derek Parfit might have approached the issue by asking how many psychological chains bind Lee today to Lee in the past. His links are more tenuous than most people's. But they persist.
In January 2019, Kristin was driving in a grocery store parking lot when her phone rang. She glimpsed the screen and froze. Lee was calling. There on the screen was his face, an old photo from when they had just started dating. She hadn't seen the photo in almost two years—it had been that long since he had called her.
She answered, and the words tumbled out of her. “Baby, I love you so much, I miss you,” she cried. “Are you OK? Do you need anything?” He didn't say anything, but she could hear his breathing on the other end. He hung up.
In that instant she realized how desperately she missed hearing his voice. “I'd been in this process of losing him, then to have this moment of him reaching out from wherever he is,” she says. “It blew my mind.”
The Cloudflare IPO in September raised $525 million. Lee, as one of the founders, suddenly became a whole lot richer. With his financial future now secure, Kristin set in motion the plan for his long-term care. She bought a 5,000-square-foot house on an acre of California's Central Coast, a spot they chose in the hope that his father, Rendon, could walk with him along the shore.
She worked with a landscape architect to tailor the outdoor space to Lee's needs. There are zigzagging paths on which Lee can roam and a fence to keep him safely inside. Nontoxic plants only. No nut or fruit trees allowed; those could be choking hazards once he develops difficulty swallowing, as his doctors anticipate he will.
Lee and his parents have moved there, and he has full-time care assistance too. Kristin shipped some of the furniture they'd bought together to make the house feel more familiar to him, and she blanketed a wall in family photos. She, Alexandra, and their sons visit occasionally.
Kristin hopes she has designed the perfect environment. Most FTD patients aren't so fortunate, if you can call it that, to wind down their lives on a personalized estate with a staff dedicated to keeping them safe and calm. Their families don't always have a choice in how involved they want to be. Still, all the money in the world can't answer the question of who, really, is living in that house.
On rare occasions, Lee still surprises his parents with an affectionate pat on the back. He calls people from time to time, even if he never speaks a word. An old colleague recently saw that he'd liked a post on LinkedIn. However diminished, a person lingers in the shattered roadways of his mind.
Some months ago, Lee sent Kristin a series of text messages. In them were photos she'd shared with him earlier: she and their son on Halloween, a trip to the park, Christmastime. At the end, he'd typed the words: “the love.”
Jack cable sat down at the desk in his cramped dorm room to become an adult in the eyes of democracy. The rangy teenager, with neatly manicured brown hair and chunky glasses, had recently arrived at Stanford—his first semester of life away from home—and the 2018 midterm elections were less than two months away.
Although he wasn’t one for covering his laptop with strident stickers or for taking loud stands, he felt a genuine thrill at the prospect of voting. But before he could cast an absentee ballot, he needed to register with the Board of Elections back home in Chicago.
When Cable tried to complete the digital forms, an error message stared at him from his browser. Clicking back to his initial entry, he realized that he had accidentally typed an extraneous quotation mark into his home address. The fact that a single keystroke had short-circuited his registration filled Cable with a sense of dread.
Despite his youth, Cable already enjoyed a global reputation as a gifted hacker—or, as he is prone to clarify, an “ethical hacker.” As a sophomore in high school, he had started participating in “bug bounties,” contests in which companies such as Google and Uber publicly invite attacks on their digital infrastructure so that they can identify and patch vulnerabilities before malicious actors can exploit them.
Cable, who is preternaturally persistent, had a knack for finding these soft spots. He collected enough cash prizes from the bug bounties to cover the costs of four years at Stanford.
Though it wouldn’t have given the average citizen a moment of pause, Cable recognized the error message on the Chicago Board of Elections website as a telltale sign of a gaping hole in its security.
It suggested that the site was vulnerable to those with less beneficent intentions than his own, that they could read and perhaps even alter databases listing the names and addresses of voters in the country’s third-largest city.
Despite his technical savvy, Cable was at a loss for how to alert the authorities. He began sending urgent warnings about the problem to every official email address he could find. Over the course of the next seven months, he tried to reach the city’s chief information officer, the Illinois governor’s office, and the Department of Homeland Security.
As he waited for someone to take notice of his missives, Cable started to wonder whether the rest of America’s electoral infrastructure was as weak as Chicago’s. He read about how, in 2016, when he was a junior in high school
Russian military intelligence—known by its initials, GRU—had hacked the Illinois State Board of Elections website, transferring the personal data of tens of thousands of voters to Moscow. The GRU had even tunneled into the computers of a small Florida company that sold software to election officials in eight states.
Out of curiosity, Cable checked to see what his home state had done to protect itself in the years since. Within 15 minutes of poking around the Board of Elections website, he discovered that its old weaknesses had not been fully repaired.
These were the most basic lapses in cybersecurity—preventable with code learned in an introductory computer-science class—and they remained even though similar gaps had been identified by the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security, not to mention widely reported in the media. The Russians could have strolled through the same door as they had in 2016.
Between classes, Cable began running tests on the rest of the national electoral infrastructure. He found that some states now had formidable defenses, but many others were like Illinois.
If a teenager in a dorm room—even an exceptionally talented one—could find these vulnerabilities, they were not going to be missed by a disciplined unit of hackers that has spent years studying these networks, a unit with the resources of a powerful nation bent on discrediting an American election.
The Russians were expecting the election of Hillary Clinton—and preparing to immediately declare it a fraud. The embassy in Washington had attempted to persuade American officials to allow its functionaries to act as observers in polling places. A Twitter campaign alleging voting irregularities was queued.
Russian diplomats were ready to publicly denounce the results as illegitimate. Events in 2016, of course, veered in the other direction. Yet the hashtag is worth pausing over for a moment, because, though it was never put to its intended use, it remains an apt title for a mission that is still unfolding.
Russia’s interference in the last presidential election is among the most closely studied phenomena in recent American history, having been examined by Special Counsel Robert Mueller and his prosecutors, by investigators working for congressional committees, by teams within Facebook and Twitter, by seemingly every think tank with access to a printing press. It’s possible, however, to mistake a plot point—the manipulation of the 2016 election—for the full sweep of the narrative.
Events in the United States have unfolded more favorably than any operative in Moscow could have ever dreamed: Not only did Russia’s preferred candidate win, but he has spent his first term fulfilling the potential it saw in him, discrediting American institutions, rending the seams of American culture, and isolating a nation that had styled itself as indispensable to the free world.
But instead of complacently enjoying its triumph, Russia almost immediately set about replicating it. Boosting the Trump campaign was a tactic; #DemocracyRIP remains the larger objective.
In the week that followed Donald Trump’s election, Russia used its fake accounts on social media to organize a rally in New York City supporting the president-elect—and another rally in New York decrying him. Hackers continued attempting to break into state voting systems; trolls continued to launch social-media campaigns intended to spark racial conflict.
Through subsidiaries, the Russian government continued to funnel cash to viral-video channels with names like In the Now and ICYMI, which build audiences with ephemera (“Man Licks Store Shelves in Online Post”), then hit unsuspecting readers with arguments about Syria and the CIA.
This winter, the Russians even secured airtime for their overt propaganda outlet Sputnik on three radio stations in Kansas, bringing the network’s drive-time depictions of American hypocrisy to the heartland. Less than six months before Election Day, the government will attempt to identify democracy’s most glaring weakness by deploying college kids on their summer break.
While the Russians continued their efforts to undermine American democracy, the United States belatedly began to devise a response. Across government—if not at the top of it—there was a panicked sense that American democracy required new layers of defense.
Senators drafted legislation with grandiose titles; bureaucrats unfurled the blueprints for new units and divisions; law enforcement assigned bodies to dedicated task forces. Yet many of the warnings have gone unheeded, and what fortifications have been built appear inadequate.
Jack Cable is a small emblem of how the U.S. government has struggled to outpace the Russians. After he spent the better part of a semester shouting into the wind, officials in Chicago and in the governor’s office finally took notice of his warnings and repaired their websites.
Cable may have a further role to play in defending America’s election infrastructure. He is part of a team of competitive hackers at Stanford—national champions three years running—that caught the attention of Alex Stamos, a former head of security at Facebook, who now teaches at the university.
Earlier this year, Stamos asked the Department of Homeland Security if he could pull together a group of undergraduates, Cable included, to lend Washington a hand in the search for bugs. “It’s talent, but unrefined talent,” Stamos told me.
DHS, which has an acute understanding of the problem at hand but limited resources to solve it, accepted Stamos’s offer. Less than six months before Election Day, the government will attempt to identify democracy’s most glaring weakness by deploying college kids on their summer break.
Despite such well-intentioned efforts, the nation’s vulnerabilities have widened, not narrowed, during the past four years. Our politics are even more raw and fractured than in 2016; our faith in government—and, perhaps, democracy itself—is further strained.
The coronavirus may meaningfully exacerbate these problems; at a minimum, the pandemic is leeching attention and resources from election defense. The president, meanwhile, has dismissed Russian interference as a hoax and fired or threatened intelligence officials who have contradicted that narrative, all while professing his affinity for the very man who ordered this assault on American democracy.
Fiona Hill, the scholar who served as the top Russia expert on Trump’s National Security Council, told me, “The fact that they faced so little consequence for their action gives them little reason to stop.”
The Russians have learned much about American weaknesses, and how to exploit them. Having probed state voting systems far more extensively than is generally understood by the public, they are now surely more capable of mayhem on Election Day—and possibly without leaving a detectable trace of their handiwork.
Having hacked into the inboxes of political operatives in the U.S. and abroad, they’ve pioneered new techniques for infiltrating campaigns and disseminating their stolen goods. Even as to disinformation, the best-known and perhaps most overrated of their tactics, they have innovated, finding new ways to manipulate Americans and to poison the nation’s politics. Russia’s interference in 2016 might be remembered as the experimental prelude that foreshadowed the attack of 2020.
When officials arrived at work on the morning of May 22, 2014, three days before a presidential election, they discovered that their hard drives were fried. Hours earlier, pro-Kremlin hackers had taken a digital sledgehammer to a vital piece of Ukraine’s democratic infrastructure, the network that collects vote tallies from across the nation. After finishing the task, they taunted their victim, posting photos of an election commissioner’s renovated bathroom and his wife’s passport.
Relying on a backup system, the Ukrainians were able to resuscitate their network. But on election night the attacks persisted. Hackers sent Russian journalists a link to a chart they had implanted on the official website of Ukraine’s Central Election Commission.
The graphic purported to show that a right-wing nationalist had sprinted to the lead in the presidential race. Although the public couldn’t access the chart, Russian state television flashed the forged results on its highly watched newscast.
If the attack on Ukraine represented something like all-out digital war, Russia’s hacking of the United States’ electoral system two years later was more like a burglar going house to house jangling doorknobs.
The Russians had the capacity to cause far greater damage than they did—at the very least to render Election Day a chaotic mess—but didn’t act on it, because they deemed such an operation either unnecessary or not worth the cost.
The U.S. intelligence community has admitted that it’s not entirely sure why Russia sat on its hands. One theory holds that Barack Obama forced Russian restraint when he pulled Vladimir Putin aside at the end of the G20 Summit in Hangzhou,
China, on September 5, 2016. With only interpreters present, Obama delivered a carefully worded admonition not to mess with the integrity of the election. By design, he didn’t elaborate any specific consequence for ignoring his warning.
Perhaps the warning was heeded. The GRU kept on probing voting systems through the month of October, however, and there are other, more ominous explanations for Russia’s apparent restraint. Michael Daniel, who served as the cybersecurity coordinator on Obama’s National Security Council, told the Senate Intelligence Committee that the Russians were, in essence, casing the joint.
They were gathering intelligence about the digital networks that undergird American elections and putting together a map so that they “could come back later and actually execute an operation.”
What sort of operation could Russia execute in 2020? Unlike Ukraine, the United States doesn’t have a central node that, if struck, could disable democracy at its core. Instead, the United States has an array of smaller but still alluring targets: the vendors, niche companies, that sell voting equipment to states and localities; the employees of those governments, each with passwords that can be stolen; voting machines that connect to the internet to transmit election results.
Matt Masterson is a senior adviser at the Department of Homeland Security’s freshly minted Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, a bureau assigned to help states protect elections from outside attack; it’s where Jack Cable will work this summer. I asked Masterson to describe the scenarios that keep him up at night.
His greatest fear is that an election official might inadvertently enable a piece of ransomware. These are malicious bits of code that encrypt data and files, essentially placing a lock on a system; money is then demanded in exchange for the key. In 2017, Ukraine was targeted again, this time with a similar piece of malware called NotPetya. But instead of extorting Ukraine, Russia sought to cripple it.
NotPetya wiped 10 percent of the nation’s computers; it disabled ATMs, telephone networks, and banks. (The United States is well aware of NotPetya’s potency, because it relied on a tool created by—and stolen from—the National Security Agency.) If the Russians attached such a bug to a voter-registration database, they could render an entire election logistically unfeasible; tracking who had voted and where they’d voted would be impossible.
But Russia need not risk such a devastating attack. It can simply meddle with voter-registration databases, which are filled with vulnerabilities similar to the ones that Cable exposed. Such meddling could stop short of purging voters from the rolls and still cause significant disruptions: Hackers could flip the digits in addresses, so that voters’ photo IDs no longer match the official records.
When people arrived at the polls, they would likely still be able to vote, but might be forced to cast provisional ballots. The confusion and additional paperwork would generate long lines and stoke suspicion about the underlying integrity of the election.
Given the fragility of American democracy, even the tiniest interference, or hint of interference, could undermine faith in the tally of the vote. On Election Night, the Russians could place a page on the Wisconsin Elections Commission website that falsely showed Trump with a sizable lead. Government officials would be forced to declare it a hoax. Imagine how Twitter demagogues, the president among them, would exploit the ensuing confusion.
Such scenarios ought to have sparked a clamor for systemic reform. But in the past, when the federal government has pointed out these vulnerabilities—and attempted to protect against them—the states have chafed and moaned.
In August 2016, President Obama’s homeland-security secretary, Jeh Johnson, held a conference call with state election officials and informed them of the need to safeguard their infrastructure. Instead of accepting his offer of help, they told him, “This is our responsibility and there should not be a federal takeover of the election system.”
After the 2016 election, the federal government could have taken a stronger hand with localities. Unprecedented acts of foreign interference presumably would have provided quite a bit of leverage. That did not happen. The president perceives any suggestion of Russian interference as the diminution of his own legitimacy.
This has contributed to a conspiracy of silence about the events of 2016. A year after the election, the Department of Homeland Security told 21 states that Russia had attempted to hack their electoral systems. Two years later, a Senate report publicly disclosed that Russia had, in fact, targeted all 50 states.
When then–DHS Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen tried to raise the subject of electoral security with the president, acting White House Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney reportedly told her to steer clear of it.
This atmosphere stifled what could have been a genuinely bipartisan accomplishment. The subject of voting divides Republicans and Democrats. Especially since the Bush v. Gore decision in 2000, the parties have stitched voting into their master narratives. Democrats accuse Republicans of suppressing the vote; Republicans accuse Democrats of flooding the polls with corpses and other cheating schemes.
Despite this rancor, both sides seemed to agree that Russian hacking of voting systems was not a good thing. After the 2016 election, Democratic Senator Amy Klobuchar, from Minnesota, partnered with Republican Senator James Lankford, from Oklahoma, on the Secure Elections Act.
The bill would have given the states money to replace electronic voting machines with ones that leave a paper trail and would have required states to audit election results to confirm their accuracy. The reforms would also have had the seemingly salutary effect of making it easier for voters to cast ballots.
The Secure Elections Act wouldn’t have provided perfect insulation from Russian attacks, but it would have been a meaningful improvement on the status quo, and it briefly looked as if it could pass. Then, on the eve of a session to mark up the legislation—a moment for lawmakers to add their final touches—Senate Republicans suddenly withdrew their support, effectively killing the bill.
Afterward, Democrats mocked Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell as “Moscow Mitch,” an appellation that stung enough that the senator ultimately agreed to legislation that supplied the states with hundreds of millions of dollars to buy new voting systems—but without any security demands placed on the states or any meaningful reforms to a broken system.
McConnell made it clear that he despised the whole idea of a legislative fix to the electoral-security problem: “I’m not going to let Democrats and their water carriers in the media use Russia’s attack on our democracy as a Trojan horse for partisan wish-list items that would not actually make our elections any safer.” For McConnell, suppressing votes was a higher priority than protecting them from a foreign adversary.
To raise the subject of John Podesta’s email in his presence is a callous act. But I wanted his help tabulating a more precise toll of Russian hacking—how it leaves a messy trail of hurt feelings, saps precious mental space, and reshapes the course of a campaign.
After repeatedly prodding him for an interview, I finally met with Hillary Clinton’s old campaign chief in his Washington office, which stares down onto the steeple of the church Abraham Lincoln attended during the Civil War.
Dressed in a plaid shirt, with a ballpoint pen clipped into the pocket, Podesta rocked back and forth in a swivel chair as he allowed me to question him about one of the most wince-inducing moments in recent political history.
Months before WikiLeaks began publishing his emails, Podesta had an inkling that his Gmail account had been compromised. Internal campaign documents had appeared on an obscure website, and he considered the possibility that they had been lifted from his computer. Still, the call from a member of the campaign’s communications team on October 7, 2016, left him gobsmacked.
As he finished a session of debate preparation with Clinton, he learned that Julian Assange intended to unfurl the contents of his inbox over the remaining month of the campaign. It’s a familiar if much-ignored maxim in politics that no email should ever contain content one wouldn’t want to see on the front page of The New York Times. This was now Podesta’s reality.
On the 10th floor of the Clinton campaign’s headquarters, in Brooklyn, a team of 14 staffers quickly assembled. They covered a glass door in opaque paper to prevent voyeurs from observing their work and began to pore over every word of his 60,000 emails—every forwarded PDF, every gripe from an employee, even the meticulous steps of his risotto recipe.
John Podesta rides the Vamoose Bus in June 2015. After WikiLeaks published the Clinton-campaign chairman’s emails, identity thieves attempted to claim his Social Security benefits and applied for credit cards in his name. One fraudster even stole the points Podesta had accumulated in the Vamoose rewards program.
The material that WikiLeaks eventually posted created some awkward moments. Podesta had received snarky emails from colleagues, and had sent a few himself. To repair relationships, Podesta found himself apologizing to co-workers, friends, former Cabinet secretaries. Even when the contents of the leaked messages seemed innocuous, new annoyances would arise.
WikiLeaks hadn’t redacted the correspondence to protect privacy, leaving the cellphone numbers of campaign staffers for the world to view. In the middle of meetings, staffers would find their devices vibrating incessantly; strangers would fill their voicemails with messages like I hope you’re raped in prison.
Identity thieves quickly circled Podesta, attempting to claim his Social Security benefits and applying for credit cards in his name. Despite a political career that has permitted him to whisper into the ears of presidents, the legendarily frugal Podesta had commuted to New York on Vamoose, a discount bus line. A fraudster exploited the hack to steal the points he had accumulated in the Vamoose rewards program.
As Podesta revisited these painful moments, he claimed that he’d stoically persisted in their face: “I kept going on television. I kept raising money. I kept traveling with Hillary and President Clinton. I kept doing everything that I had been doing.” But these were the closing weeks of an election that would turn on fewer than 80,000 votes spread across three states.
For a campaign that arguably didn’t invest its resources properly in the final stretch, the question must be asked: How badly did the Russians throw the campaign off its game? The least visible damage of the hack might have been the most decisive.
In the years since the Podesta hack, Microsoft’s Tom Burt has continually battled its perpetrators. As the man charged with safeguarding the security of Windows, Word, and his company’s other software, he has developed a feel for the GRU’s rhythms and habits. Through Microsoft’s work with political parties and campaigns around the world—the company offers them training and sells them security software at a discount—Burt has accumulated lengthy dossiers on past actions.
What he’s noticed is that attacks tend to begin on the furthest fringes of a campaign. A standard GRU operation starts with think-tank fellows, academics, and political consultants. These people and institutions typically have weak cybersecurity fortifications, the penetration of which serves dual purposes.
As the GRU pores through the inboxes of wonks and professors, it gathers useful intelligence about a campaign. But the hacked accounts also provide platforms for a more direct assault. Once inside, the GRU will send messages from the hacked accounts. The emails come from a trusted source, and carry a plausible message.
According to Burt, “It will say something like ‘Saw this great article on the West Bank that you should review,’ and it’s got a link to a PDF. You click on it, and now your campaign network is infected.” (Although Burt won’t discuss specific institutions, he wrote a blog post last year describing attacks on the German Marshall Fund and the European offices of the Aspen Institute.)
Podesta fell victim to a generic spear-phishing attack: a spoofed security warning urging him to change his Gmail password. Many of us might like to think we’re sophisticated enough to avoid such a trap, but the Russians have grown adept at tailoring bespoke messages that could ensnare even the most vigilant target.
Emails arrive from a phony address that looks as if it belongs to a friend or colleague, but has one letter omitted. One investigator told me that he’s noticed that Russians use details gleaned from Facebook to script tantalizing messages. If a campaign consultant has told his circle of friends about an upcoming bass-fishing trip, the GRU will package its malware in an email offering discounts on bass-fishing gear.
Many of these techniques are borrowed from Russian cybercrime syndicates, which hack their way into banks and traffic in stolen credit cards. Burt has seen these illicit organizations using technologies that he believes will soon be imported to politics. For instance, new synthetic-audio software allows hackers to mimic a voice with convincing verisimilitude.
Burt told me, “In the cybercrime world, you’re starting to see audio phishes, where somebody gets a voicemail message from their boss, for example, saying, ‘Hey, I need you to transfer this money to the following account right away.’ It sounds just like your boss and so you do it.”
What the Russians can’t obtain from afar, they will attempt to pilfer with agents on the ground. The same GRU unit that hacked Podesta has allegedly sent operatives to Rio de Janeiro, Kuala Lumpur, and The Hague to practice what is known as “close-access hacking.” Once on the ground, they use off-the-shelf electronic equipment to pry open the Wi-Fi network of whomever they’re spying on.
The Russians, in other words, take risks few other nations would dare. They are willing to go to such lengths because they’ve reaped such rich rewards from hacking. Of all the Russian tactics deployed in 2016, the hacking and leaking of documents did the most immediate and palpable damage—distracting attention from the Access Hollywood tape, and fueling theories that the Democratic Party had rigged its process to squash Bernie Sanders’s campaign.
In 2020, the damage could be greater still. Podesta told me that when he realized his email had been breached, he feared that the hackers would manufacture embarrassing or even incriminating emails and then publish them alongside the real ones. It’s impossible to know their reasoning, but Russian hackers made what would prove to be a clever decision not to alter Podesta’s email.
Many media outlets accepted whatever emails WikiLeaks published without pausing to verify every detail, and they weren’t punished for their haste. The Podesta leaks thus established a precedent, an expectation that hacked material is authentic—perhaps the most authentic version of reality available, an opportunity to see past a campaign’s messaging and spin and read its innermost thoughts.
In fact, the Russians have no scruples about altering documents. In 2017, hackers with links to the GRU breached the inboxes of French President Emmanuel Macron’s campaign staffers. The contents were rather banal, filled with restaurant reservations and trivial memos. Two days before these were released, other documents surfaced on internet message boards. Unlike the emails, these were pure fabrications, which purported to show that Macron had used a tax haven in the Cayman Islands.
The timing of their release, however, gave them credibility. It was natural to assume that they had been harvested from the email hack, too. The Macron leaks suggested a dangerous new technique, a sinister mixing of the hacked and the fabricated intended to exploit the electorate’s hunger for raw evidence and faith in purloined documents.
In the spring of 2015, trolls in St. Petersburg peered at the feed of a webcam that had been furtively placed in New York City. Sitting in front of a computer screen on the second floor of a squat concrete office building, the trolls waited to see if they could influence the behavior of Americans from the comfort of Russian soil.
The men worked for a company bankrolled by Yevgeny Prigozhin, a bald-headed hot-dog vendor turned restaurateur, known to the Russian press as “Putin’s chef.” In the kleptocratic system that is the Russian economy, men like Prigozhin profit from their connections to Putin and maintain their inner-circle status by performing missions on his behalf. The operation in St. Petersburg was run by the Internet Research Agency, a troll farm serving the interests of the Kremlin. (Prigozhin has denied any involvement with the IRA.)
The IRA is an heir to a proud Russian tradition. In the Soviet Union’s earliest days, the state came to believe that it could tip the world toward revolution through psychological warfare and deception, exploiting the divisions and weaknesses of bourgeois society. When it was assigned this task, the KGB referred to its program by the bureaucratic yet ominous name Active Measures.
It pursued this work with artistic verve. It forged letters from the Ku Klux Klan that threatened to murder African athletes at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. It fomented conspiracies about the CIA—that the agency had orchestrated the spread of the AIDS virus in a laboratory and plotted the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. Some of these KGB schemes were harebrained. But as one defector to the West put it, more Americans believed the Soviet version of JFK’s murder than the Warren Report.
The IRA has updated the principles of Active Measures for the digital age. On social media, disinformation can flourish like never before. Whereas the KGB once needed to find journalistic vehicles to plant their stories—usually the small-audience fringes of the radical press—Facebook and Twitter hardly distinguished between mainstream outlets and clickbait upstarts. And many of the new platforms were designed to manipulate users, to keep them engaged for as long as possible. Their algorithms elevated content that fueled panic and anger.
With the New York webcam, the IRA was testing a hunch: that, through the miracle of social media, it could now toy with Americans as if they were marionettes. As the political scientist Thomas Rid recounts in his powerful new history, Active Measures, a post on Facebook promised that free hot dogs would be available to anyone who arrived on a specific corner at a prescribed time. Back in St. Petersburg, IRA employees watched as New Yorkers arrived, looked at their phones in frustration, and skulked away.
The ruse was innocuous, but it proved a theory that could be put to far more nefarious ends: Social media had made it possible, at shockingly low cost, for Russians to steer the emotions and even movements of Americans. No study has quantified how many votes have been swayed by the 10 million tweets that the IRA has pumped into the digital world; no metric captures how its posts on Facebook and Instagram altered America’s emotional valence as it headed to the polls in 2016.
In the end, the IRA’s menagerie of false personas and fusillades of splenetic memes were arguably more effective at garnering sensationalistic headlines than shifting public opinion. For their part, the IRA’s minions immodestly credited themselves with having tilted the trajectory of history.
The U.S. government obtained an email from an IRA employee describing the scene at the St. Petersburg office on Election Night: “When around 8 a.m. the most important result of our work arrived, we uncorked a tiny bottle of champagne … took one gulp each and looked into each other’s eyes … We uttered almost in unison: ‘We made America great.’ ”
Having run a noisy operation in 2016, the IRA has since learned to modulate itself. Its previous handiwork, much of which was riddled with poor syntax and grammatical errors, hardly required a discerning eye to identify. These days, the IRA takes care to avoid such sloppiness. Now, when they want to, IRA trolls can make themselves inconspicuous.
Relying on this quieter approach, the IRA has carried the theory of its hot-dog experiment into American political life. When white supremacists applied for a permit to hold a march in 2018 to commemorate the first anniversary of their protests in Charlottesville, Virginia, a Facebook group organized a counterprotest in Washington, D.C. The group was called the Resisters.
Its administrators, who went by the names Mary and Natasha, recruited a coterie of enthusiastic organizers to promote the rally. When Facebook took down the Resisters’ page—noting its ties to IRA accounts, and implying that Mary and Natasha were fictitious creations—American leftists were shocked to learn that they had apparently been hatching plans with foreign trolls.
According to The New York Times, they were also furious with Facebook: Whether or not the page was a Russian ploy, it had become a venue for real Americans to air their real grievances. In fact, it was hard to pinpoint where the Active Measures ended and the genuine action began—the sort of tradecraft that the KGB would have admired.
Although the IRA might practice stealth when the operation demands, in other circumstances it will deploy raw bluster. Starting in 2017, it launched a sustained effort to exaggerate the specter of its interference, a tactic that social-media companies call “perception hacking.” Its trolls were instructed to post about the Mueller report and fan the flames of public anger over the blatant interference it revealed.
On the day of the 2018 midterm elections, a group claiming to be the IRA published a grandiloquent manifesto on its website that declared: “Soon after November 6, you will realize that your vote means nothing. We decide who you vote for and what candidates will win or lose. Whether you vote or not, there is no difference as we control the voting and counting systems.
The claim was absurd, but the posturing had a purpose. If enough Americans come to believe that Russia can do whatever it wants to our democratic processes without consequence, that, too, increases cynicism about American democracy, and thereby serves Russian ends. As Laura Rosenberger, a former National Security Council staffer under Obama who runs the Alliance for Securing Democracy, put it, “They would like us to see a Russian under every bed.”
Judging by this year’s presidential-primary campaign, they have been successful in this effort. When the Iowa Democratic Party struggled to implement new technology used to tally results for the state’s caucus, television panelists, Twitter pundits, and even a member of Congress speculated about the possibility of hacking, despite a lack of evidence to justify such loose talk. American incompetence had been confused for a plot against America.
As the outlines of the IRA’s efforts began to emerge in the months following the 2016 election, Facebook at first refused to acknowledge the problem. The company’s defensiveness called attention to its laissez-faire attitude toward the content that it elevated in people’s News Feeds. Facebook found itself flayed by congressional committees, its inner workings exposed by investigative journalists.
Ostensibly it had been Alex Stamos’s job to prevent the last attack, and now he faced another wave of disinformation, with midterm elections fast approaching. Stamos worried that, in the absence of an orchestrated defense, his company, as well as the nation, would repeat the mistakes of 2016.
In the spring of 2018, he invited executives from the big tech companies and leaders of intelligence agencies to Facebook’s headquarters in Menlo Park, California. As he thought about it, Stamos was surprised that such a summit hadn’t been organized sooner. What shocked him more was a realization he had as the meeting convened: Few of these people even knew one another.
“People who ran different agencies working on foreign interference met for the first time at Menlo Park, even though they were 10 Metro stops away in D.C.,” he told me. “The normal collaborative process in government didn’t exist on this issue.”
Stamos’s summit succeeded in spurring cooperation. Prior to the meeting, one tech company would identify and disable Russian accounts but fail to warn its competitors, allowing the same trolls to continue operating with impunity. Over the course of 2018, the tech industry gradually began acting in concert.
The lead investigators on the threat-intelligence teams at 30 companies—including Facebook, Verizon, and Reddit—joined a common channel on Slack, the messaging platform. When one company spies a nascent operation, it can now ring a bell for the others.
This winter, Facebook and Twitter jointly shut down dozens of accounts associated with a single residential address in Accra, Ghana, where the Russians had set up a troll factory and hired local 20-somethings to impersonate African Americans and stoke online anger.
Yet this remains a game of cat and mouse in which the mice enjoy certain advantages. Despite the engineering prowess of the social-media companies, they haven’t yet built algorithms capable of reliably identifying coordinated campaigns run by phony Russian accounts. In most instances, their algorithms will suggest the inauthenticity of certain accounts. Those data points become a lead, which is then passed along to human investigators.
Facebook has several dozen employees on its threat-intelligence team, many of them alumni of the three-letter agencies in Washington. Still, the tech companies rely heavily on law enforcement for tips. Facebook and Twitter have frequent check-ins with the FBI. Without the bureau, Facebook might have missed an IRA video filled with lies about Russian tampering in the midterm elections.
After a heads-up from the government, Facebook blocked the IRA from uploading the video before it ever appeared on its site, using the same technique that it deploys to suppress Islamic State snuff videos and child pornography.
Rising from their denialist crouch, the social-media companies have proved themselves capable of aggressive policing; after treating the IRA as a harmless interloper, they came to treat it with the sort of disdain they otherwise reserve for terrorists and deviants.
Devising strategies for thwarting the last attack is far easier than preventing the next one. Even if Russian disinformation can be tamped down on social media—and the efforts here, on balance, are encouraging—there are other ways, arguably more consequential, to manipulate American politics, and scant defense against them.
On an early-March afternoon, I typed the Federal Election Commission as a destination into Uber and was disgorged at a building the agency hasn’t occupied for two years. The antiquated address placed me on course to arrive half an hour late for an appointment with Ellen Weintraub, the longest-serving and most vociferous member of the commission nominally assigned to block the flow of foreign money into political campaigns.
When I called her office to inform her of my tardiness, her assistant told me not to worry: Weintraub’s schedule was wide open that afternoon. In fact, for the past six months the FEC hadn’t conducted much official business. Only three Senate-approved commissioners were installed in their jobs, even though the agency should have six and needs four for a quorum.
Weintraub, a Democrat, has an impish streak. Near the beginning of the FEC’s hibernation, she called out a fellow commissioner who had blocked the publication of a memo that seemed to criticize the Trump campaign for its 2016 meeting with a Russian lawyer—then posted the memo in a 57-part thread on Twitter. Weintraub has grown accustomed to her colleagues ignoring her questions about the presence of Russian and other illicit money in American campaigns.
When the commission received a complaint suggesting that the FBI was investigating the National Rifle Association as a conduit for Russian money, she asked her fellow commissioners for permission to call the FBI, to, as she put it, “see if they have interesting information they want to share. But they said, ‘We’re not going to call the FBI.’ They didn’t want to do anything.”
Outside Weintraub’s office, the subject of Russia’s illicit financing of campaigns hardly provokes any attention. The Alliance for Securing Democracy was the only organization I could find that comprehensively tracks the issue.
It has collected examples of Russian money flowing into campaigns around the world: a 9.4-million-euro loan made to the French nationalist Marine Le Pen’s party; operatives arriving in Madagascar before an election with backpacks full of cash to buy TV ads on behalf of Russia’s preferred candidate and to pay journalists to cover his rallies.
Or take a case closer to home: Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman—the Soviet-born Americans who worked with Rudy Giuliani in his search for politically damaging material to deploy against former Vice President Joe Biden—were charged with conspiring to funnel money from an unnamed Russian into American campaigns.
Some of the cases cited by the Alliance for Securing Democracy are circumstantial, but they form a pattern. Since 2016, the group has identified at least 60 instances of Russia financing political campaigns beyond its borders. (The Kremlin denies meddling in foreign elections.)
When I asked Weintraub if she had a sense of how many such examples exist in American politics, she replied, “We know there’s stuff going on out there, and we’re just not doing anything.” Since the Supreme Court’s 2010 Citizens United decision, which lifted restrictions on campaign finance, hardly any systemic checks preclude foreigners from subsidizing politicians using the cover of anonymous shell companies.
With that decision, the high court opened the door for Russia to pursue one of its favored methods of destabilizing global democracy. By covertly financing campaigns, the Russians have helped elevate extremist politicians and nurture corrosive social movements.
“Everyone knows there are loopholes in our campaign-finance system,” Weintraub said. “Why would we think that our adversaries, who have demonstrated a desire to muck around in our democracy, wouldn’t be using those loopholes, too?”
Problems of inattention, problems of coordination, and deep concerns about November—these themes came up over and over in my interviews for this story. Indeed, at times everyone seemed to be sounding the same alarm. H. R. McMaster, who briefly served as Donald Trump’s national security adviser, sounded it when he proposed a new task force to focus the government’s often shambolic efforts to safeguard the election.
There was a moment that crystallized Schiff’s sense of this disjointedness. In the summer of 2018, he attended a security conference in Aspen, Colorado, where Tom Burt revealed that Microsoft had detected Russian phishing attacks targeting Democratic senatorial candidates.
“When I went back to Washington,” Schiff told me, “I asked agency heads within the [intelligence community] whether they were aware of this. The answer was no.” That the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee had to learn this elemental fact about his own branch of government at a public gathering is troubling; that the people charged with protecting the country didn’t know it is flabbergasting.
The sprawling federal bureaucracy has never been particularly adept at the kind of coordination necessary to anticipate a wily adversary’s next move. But there is another reason for the government’s alarmingly inadequate response: a president who sees attempts to counter the Russia threat as a personal affront.
After McMaster was fired, having made little if any progress on Russia, the director of national intelligence, Dan Coats, took up the cause, installing in his office an election-security adviser named Shelby Pierson. This past February, Pierson briefed Schiff’s committee that the Russians were planning to interfere in the upcoming election, and that Trump remained Moscow’s preferred candidate.
Anyone who follows the president on Twitter knows this is a subject that provokes his fury. Indeed, the day after Pierson’s testimony, the president upbraided Coats’s successor, Joseph Maguire, for Pierson’s assessment. A week later, he fired Maguire and installed in his place the ambassador to Germany, Richard Grenell, a loyalist with no intelligence experience.
Grenell immediately set about confirming the wisdom behind Trump’s choice. Three weeks into his tenure, a senior intelligence official in the Office of the DNI informed the Senate that Pierson’s assessment was mistaken.
Trump had graphically illustrated his recurring message to the intelligence community: He doesn’t want to hear warnings about Russian interference. Mark Warner, the highest-ranking Democrat on the Senate Intelligence Committee, told me, “A day doesn’t go by that I don’t hear from someone in the intelligence community saying, ‘Oh my gosh, we’re worried about integrity, we’re worried about morale, we’re worried about willingness to speak truth to power.’
” I asked Warner whether he could still trust the intelligence about Russia he received—whether he has faith that the government will render an accurate portrait of the Russian threat to the upcoming presidential election. As he considered his answer, he leaned toward me. “I don’t know the answer to that,” he replied, “and that bothers me.”
Vladimir Putin dreams of discrediting the American democratic system, and he will never have a more reliable ally than Donald Trump. A democracy can’t defend itself if it can’t honestly describe the attacks against it. But the president hasn’t just undermined his own country’s defenses—he has actively abetted the adversary’s efforts.
If Russia wants to tarnish the political process as hopelessly rigged, it has a bombastic amplifier standing behind the seal of the presidency, a man who reflexively depicts his opponents as frauds and any system that produces an outcome he doesn’t like as fixed.
If Russia wants to spread disinformation, the president continually softens an audience for it, by instructing the public to disregard authoritative journalism as the prevarications of a traitorous elite and by spouting falsehoods on Twitter.
In 2020, Russia might not need to push the U.S. for it to suffer a terrible election-year tumble. Even without interventions from abroad, it is shockingly easy to imagine how a pandemic might provide a pretext for indefinitely delaying an election or how this president, narrowly dispatched at the polls, might refuse to accept defeat. But restraint wouldn’t honor Russia’s tradition of Active Measures. And there may never be a moment quite so ripe for taking the old hashtag out of storage and giving it a triumphalist turn.
The internet in Russia is already a very different place than it was before the invasion of Ukraine just two weeks ago. There’s limited access to major social media sites like Twitter and Facebook.
Movie fans can no longer stream Netflix. Creators can no longer upload videos to TikTok. Freelancers can no longer find work on Upwork. And citizens can only see what the Kremlin wants them to see about the war in Ukraine.
But new documents published by the Kremlin this week suggest that the Russian government is preparing for things to get much worse. The documents reveal that the Kremlin is seeking to eradicate reliance on any Western internet services
potentially isolating itself from the rest of the global internet, a move that would send Russia back to the digital dark ages, further crippling its economy and ending the promise that a free and open internet could act as a check on authoritarian leaders like Vladimir Putin.
On Monday reports circulated on social media that the Kremlin was going to disconnect from the global internet by Friday, March 11, based on two documents published by the Ministry of Digital Development.
These documents outlined a series of measures the Kremlin wants state-owned websites and online portals to implement by the end of this week in order to “coordinate actions to defend telecommunication services on the internet.”
Essentially, the Kremlin was taking steps to allow its government websites to continue to work in the event of further cyberattacks, which have bombarded Russian online portals since the beginning of the Ukraine invasion.
To achieve this, the Kremlin wants websites to switch from foreign hosting services to Russian-owned ones and to remove any Javascript created by foreign companies (such as tracking code written by Google or Facebook).
Effectively the Kremlin is seeking to remove any reliance on Western technology that could be removed without warning and bring down Russian government websites.
“There are continuous cyberattacks on Russian sites from abroad. We are preparing for different scenarios. There are no plans to disconnect the internet from inside,” Andrey  Chernenko, the ministry’s deputy director, told Russian news agency Interfax.
“It’s mostly a list of commonsense measures to ensure the protection of government websites from all kinds of attacks,” Oleg Shakirov, an international security expert based in Moscow, told VICE News. “It’s about collecting data about the infrastructure of government websites and making sure they are protected and accessible.”
But the documents also direct websites to begin using Domain Name System (DNS) servers located in Russia. The global DNS acts as the telephone book for the internet, allowing users to translate URLs like “vice.com” into the IP addresses that computers use to communicate.
And that’s something Shakirov cannot explain. “The only point that raises questions is about ‘DNS servers located in Russia.’ I don’t know what they mean by this. There was a measure in the 2019 sovereign internet law on the national DNS, but I can’t tell if this exists and if the measures in the memos are about that.”
The 2019 sovereign Internet law was a controversial bill that gave the Kremlin much more control over the internet in Russia, including the ability to easily surveil and track online activity as well as filter information, like China does with its Great Firewall.
Part of that plan was building an independent Russian DNS, entirely separate from the global system. It was scheduled to be in place by the end of 2021, but despite the Kremlin running several tests of this new sovereign internet, the infrastructure is still not fully in place, Alena Epifanova, a Russian cyber-policy expert at the German Council on Foreign Relations, told Fortune.
The digital ministry’s documents clearly show that the Kremlin is keen to move its infrastructure onto Russian-only servers and services as soon as possible, and while the measures are certainly going to protect the sites from cyberattack, they will also help if the Russian government decides to disconnect from the internet.
Last week Ukraine wrote a letter to the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), the U.S.-based nonprofit organization that manages the distribution of internet domain names, seeking Russia’s suspension from the internet’s domain registry system.
ICANN ultimately denied the request after many activists pointed out what a terrible idea it would be to effectively cut the cord on Russia’s access to the global internet, given that it would hurt ordinary citizens more than it would the Kremlin.
But days later, the effort to disconnect Russia from the rest of the internet began anyway, when Cogent Communications, an internet backbone company that owns the infrastructure that routes data across continents, announced it was terminating all contracts with its Russian customers, which include high-profile accounts like the state-backed telecom giant Rostelecom and Russian search engine Yandex.
Cogent’s decision won’t cut off Russian customers entirely, but it will slow internet traffic in Russia and congest the connections that other internet backbone companies provide to the country. And if other backbone companies decide to join forces, it could have a crippling effect on Russians’ ability to access the internet.
And so, viewed through this lens, the announcement by the digital ministry on Monday can be seen as preparatory steps for when, rather than if, the country is cut off digitally by the outside world.
“The steps outlined in the reports are realistic milestones that would keep a baseline of network service available in the case of a disconnect from the global internet,” Alp Toker, director of the digital advocacy group Netblocks, which tracks internet outages around the world, told VICE News.
“Taken to its ultimate conclusion, Russia’s internet would become fully isolated, with any international links subject to deep surveillance,” Toker said. “This may not happen overnight, but it can happen in a short timeframe, as Russia has already done much of the groundwork.
The calculation may be that the worst economic impacts have already been exacted, but in reality, the move would present a cultural shift unlike any witnessed since the collapse of the Soviet Union.”
Scientists have discovered a new cluster of unknown radio waves emanating from our galaxy’s center. According to scientists, the signals don’t line up with any known space object.
As detailed in a new paper published on Tuesday in the American Astronomical Society,  researchers from the University of Sydney located a light formation at the center of the Milky Way six times between January and September of 2020.
Each time it was a different size, polarized every time, meaning it rotating in a corkscrew pattern at a constant rate. All of this points to the possibility that this is a new class of object in space, such as a new type of star.
“It seems different to all types of astronomical objects we know, it may be a new type of object,” said Ziteng Wang, lead author of the study and a PhD student in the School of Physics at the University of Sydney in an email to Motherboard.
“If this source is an example of a previously undiscovered class of object, it would be interesting to study these types of  sources to further understand their origin.”
The team promptly named the cluster of signals ASKAP, a nod to the object’s coordinates in space and the telescope Wang and his team used: the Australian Square Kilometre Array Pathfinder Variables and Slow Transients (ASKAP VAST).
With 36 dish antennas, the device, located in western Australia, uses high survey speeds designed to identify a wide variety of radio waves, ideal for picking up an object with waves at varying frequencies like the one Wang and his team identified.
“Our eye cannot distinguish between circularly polarized light and unpolarised one, but ASKAP has the equivalent of polaroid sunglasses to filter it out,” Wang said. “These kinds of sources are really rare, usually we only found ten out of thousands of sources polarized in one observation.”
The researchers also used the South African MeerKAT telescope, with 64 antennas, to identify the signal once they’d spotted it via the ASKAP.
Working at a slightly different frequency and higher capability to detect pulsing radio waves, the second device gave the researchers a second look at the signal—this was crucial to landing on a few possible explanations for what the object could be i, Wang says.
“We started the MeerKAT observation from 2020 November, and we detected nothing until February, 2021,” Wang said. “Without another detection, it would be hard to know further details of the signal. We were really excited at that time.”
The images are unlike anything known to the scientific community, and, in fact, Wang and his team were unable to settle on one precise idea of what they could be.
The object could be one of a number of things, they write in the paper. It could be  low-mass, or low-brightness star, a pulsar,  a magnetar,  or a Galactic Center Radio Transient, which is a catch-all term for bursts of radio activity from the galaxy’s center without a settled explanation.
Yet, none of these hypotheses quite aligns with what Wang and his team saw in the star: It lacks the infrared wavelengths of a low-mass star, the regular pulsations of a pulsar, and the x-ray waves of a magnetar. It could be called a GCRT, but those “are still a mystery,” Wang says. “We don’t even know if all GCRTs share a common origin, it is hard to say.”
Though still uncertain, the authors believe the star could represent a new class of galactic objects only discoverable through radio imaging surveys, which specifically capture radio waves. If true, it could open up a new field of astronomy, or a new segment of the Milky Way, for research.
“We need to do further investigations,” Wang said. “We might be able to use this kind of source as a clue to research something exciting, such as the expansion of the universe, fate of stars.”
As Russia makes preparations to possibly disconnect from the global internet in a bid to control the narrative around the invasion of Ukraine, one secretive U.S. company is rushing to lay the final pieces of an unbreakable network that the Kremlin won’t be able to take down.
The company is Lantern, which says it has seen staggering growth inside Russia in the last four weeks for its app that allows users to bypass restrictions the Kremlin has put in place on platforms like Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.
But now the company is building something even more robust, an internal peer-to-peer network that will allow dissenting voices to continue to upload and share content even if the Kremlin pulls the plug on the internet.
“We’ve been putting pieces in place in Russia for the last two years,” Lucas, one of Lantern’s developers, who uses a pseudonym to protect his identity, told VICE News. “So inside Russia right now, Lantern is also this peer-to-peer network that has all of this opposition content that’s distributed internally.”
Within the next week, the network will be fully operational, allowing opposition voices to use the Lantern app to post content like videos from protests or updates on the war in Ukraine directly to the Lantern network. This would allow users to share it with other Lantern users without fear that the content will be removed or blocked.
The app, which has in the past received funding from the Open Technology Fund, an independent non-profit funded by the U.S government, has become a huge hit in Russia in recent weeks.
The amount of traffic passing through Lantern’s servers has risen 100,000% in the last four weeks according to the company, though it did not provide a baseline figure for comparison.
Lantern said it would not break out country-level user numbers but told VICE News that globally the app has been downloaded 150 million times and has 7 million active monthly users, double the number it had three years ago.
The spike in usage came after the Kremlin began shutting off access to mainstream social media sites while also introducing a law that threatened anyone publishing “fake news” about the war in Ukraine with up to 15 years in jail.
The growth has been so rapid that Lantern says Russia this week surpassed China as its biggest market in terms of traffic, though China has been the company’s primary focus for years.
The developers have spent years playing a game of cat-and-mouse with the Chinese censors who maintain the Great Firewall, Beijing’s highly sophisticated network of filters, bans, and blocks that prevent the free flow of information online.
And just like in China, the developers of Lantern don’t have a clue how so many people in Russia have begun using their app.
“It just started to spread and the same thing has happened in every region we’ve been in as well: It’s just word of mouth,” Lantern co-founder Wolf told VICE News. “We still don’t know. There are over 150 million downloads [of the app] and we haven’t spent one cent on marketing. So we’ve no idea how it spreads.”
Wolf and Lucas, who have decades of experience building and scaling successful tech products, both use pseudonyms to protect their identities, fearing retaliation from the regimes in Beijing, and now Moscow, for helping people circumvent censorship.
Aside from a couple of blog posts on Medium, Lantern has spent no money or effort on advertising or promotion inside Russia, and yet downloads on Google and Apple’s app stores have surged among Russian users eager to get an unfiltered view of the war in Ukraine.
Part of the reason for this is that digital rights groups such as Access Now have been recommending Lantern, along with other anti-censorship tools like Tor and TunnelBear, to people in Russia seeking to get access to unfiltered information.
“Now I have a window to the normal world from this prison called Russia,” one Russian user said this week in an email to Lucas.
As the so-called “Digital Iron Curtain” has closed in recent weeks, Russian users have scrambled to find ways around it. In the days and weeks after the Russian invasion of Ukraine began, downloads of the top virtual private network (VPN) apps on Apple and Google’s app stores spiked, CNN reported.
Natalia Krapiva, legal counsel with digital rights advocacy group Access Now says she’s unsurprised by the spike in Lantern users but says the number of people inside Russia using these types of tools is still in the minority.
We’re definitely seeing them moving from being more of a niche tool turning into something much more widely used,” Krapiva told VICE News. “I wouldn't go so far as to say that the majority of people use them, I think we're still not there. I think there are still a lot of people, especially older, not as tech-savvy people who still don't know what VPNs are, how to use them, or which ones are safe.”
While other VPN companies have reported some efforts to disrupt their services in Russia, Lantern works differently from a traditional VPN by focusing on finding ways to access blocked content.
As a result, it can be used to access regionally locked down content on services like Netflix or BBC iPlayer, but its censorship-busting technology is more robust.
The company says it’s seen no interruption to its services in Russia in recent weeks, largely thanks to the experience it gained battling China’s censors in recent years.
“You need to remember that the Russian government is not going to be technically as good as China’s at squeezing our traffic and doing shit to us,” Wolf said. “China has so much more experience of screwing around with international traffic in general.”
But Lantern’s ability to bypass the measures the Kremlin has put in place may soon be thwarted because Moscow is considering disconnecting from the global internet completely.
The Russian government recently put measures in place that will allow it to disconnect completely from the global internet and rely on a so-called “sovereign internet” that would be entirely under Kremlin control.
Just a month ago the idea that the Kremlin would pull the plug on the global internet was dismissed given how interconnected Russia was with the global economy with the global internet.
But in the way of severe sanctions, Western companies pulling out of Russia, and the Kremlin already blocking large swathes of the wider internet, the possibility of it happening is increasingly likely.
“There's little incentive for Russia to stay connected because the world is already disconnecting Russia themselves,” Krapiva said. “if Russia does disconnect, and then the world disconnects Russia, then we're going to have people just isolated and left alone, only with government surveillance, propaganda, and censorship, and that's not going to be helpful for anyone.”
If that happens, Russian internet users won’t be able to access any non-Russian websites, even if they are using services like traditional VPNs, and this is where Lantern’s new peer-to-peer network will become so important
allowing users to continue to communicate and post content on an uncensorable network where videos, images, and other information can be shared freely among users—and there’s nothing the Kremlin can do about it.
Lantern was founded in California in 2010 with the goal of keeping “the world’s information, speech, expression, and finance uncensored.” The free version of the app has a data cap of 500MB, but the pro version, which costs $32 a year, has no data cap.
It has become hugely popular in China because of its ability to stay one step ahead of the government’s censorship efforts, spreading mainly via word-of-mouth as it’s not available via the Google or Apple app stores inside China.
In Russia, like all new markets it enters, Lantern removed the data cap for all users. Despite this, some users still paid for the pro version. “We started to see a lot of revenue coming in from Russia,” Wolf said, adding that financial sanctions against Russia quickly shut off that revenue stream.
This is something that has impacted many anti-censorship tools as payment companies have arbitrarily prevented Russians from paying for VPNs or other tools claiming they were doing so in solidarity with Ukraine or simply imposing sanctions.
“A lot of it is misguided precisely for the reason that they're actually limiting Russian users ability to get the truth about what's happening in Ukraine and circumvent censorship,” Krapiva said.
Demand for the tools like Lantern has rocketed in recent years as internet freedoms globally have been declining for more than a decade. In recent years the company has seen large growth in countries like the United Arab Emirates and Iran, where repressive regimes restrict access to large swathes of online content, including independent media outlets that are critical of the government.
As well as the money it earns from its pro users, the company is funded by grants from various bodies, although its parent company, Innovate Labs, doesn’t disclose its sources of funding.
One known source of funding, however, is the U.S. State Department, via its Open Technology Fund, which provided a total of $790,000 to Lantern in 2015. Lantern is one of several anti-censorship technologies that the OTF supports, including the encrypted web browser Tor and secure browsing tool Psiphon.
The company has so far been reticent to speak to the media because the founders are wary about attracting the attention of regimes like China’s and Russia’s, and the possible fallout for them and their families.
“We all have kids,” Wolf said. “We are trying to actively come out of the shadows. We don’t want to be some small confrontational tech company that fights governments, we want to grow to be a cutting-edge tech company. But we’ve got to get the balance right while we figure it all out.”
But it’s increasingly hard to stay out of the limelight, as the app’s success in Russia shows, and will soon increase as the company is planning to roll out an even more ambitious product in the coming months.
Lantern told VICE News that it is in the final stages of building another product that will allow people all over the world to host information on their own computers in censorship-free countries and provide access to that information to those inside repressive regimes.
“People can run the Lantern [node] in these uncensored regions and act as access points for people in censored regions. So if you want to help out in Ukraine, and you’re in Berlin, just fire up Lantern, and it can become the gateway now for someone in Moscow,” Lucas said.
To encourage people to set up a Lantern node, the company has created a cryptocurrency called Yinbi, which will be paid to those who allow their computers to act as hubs in this new decentralized network.
But for now, Wolf says that Lantern is focused on Russia, and ensuring that no matter what the Kremlin does, its users inside the country will be able to access the information they need if “the Kremlin pulls the plug on the internet.”
Uncovering the geologic structure beneath Earth's surface is important for a variety of reasons, including identifying natural resources and studying earthquake hazards. Scientists image Earth's subsurface by observing seismic waves that travel through our planet.
When an earthquake occurs, several types of waves radiate from the event's source. P waves and S waves move through the interior, and Love and Rayleigh waves (known as "surface waves" or "normal modes") move across Earth's surface. The speeds at which these waves travel and how each type is scattered in the subsurface can reveal a wealth of different information about underground structure.
To study seismic waves, scientists generally must wait for earthquakes, which are unpredictable, or create their own using explosions. In the past couple of decades, however, researchers have developed additional ways to study the subsurface noninvasively by using ambient noise, the constant hum of sounds made by people and natural processes, like mining activities or waves crashing on a beach.
In a new study, Li et al. demonstrate the possibility of imaging the subsurface using not only normal modes produced by ambient noise, but also another naturally occurring type of seismic wave called leaky, or leaking, modes. Leaky modes can occur when a seismic wave is "trapped," bouncing back and forth between two layers of rock.
When energy escapes from this bouncing wave, it creates a separate wave referred to as the leaky mode. Compared with normal modes, which are more sensitive to S wave velocity structure underground, leaky modes are more sensitive to P wave velocity structure.
The authors looked at 1 month of ambient noise picked up by a dense array of seismometers called the Large-n Seismic Survey in Oklahoma (LASSO). Studying both normal and leaky modes extracted from the seismic data, they calculated the speeds at which the waves had moved through the subsurface.
Those speeds, in turn, are specific to properties of the rocks below, such as their density and elasticity.
Species that rely on darkness to forage and feed are losing the gift of camouflage thanks to advances in the lighting used to illuminate the world's cities and coastlines, a study has shown.
The worldwide proliferation of energy efficient broad spectrum lighting has the potential to disrupt an array of visually guided ecological processes.
New research has demonstrated that these new lighting technologies can significantly improve a predator's ability to discriminate prey species against a natural background.
The magnitude of this effect varies depending on an organism's color, meaning certain color variations may be at greater risk.
The study, published in the Journal of Applied Ecology, was conducted by researchers at the University of Plymouth and Plymouth Marine Laboratory (PML).
It is one of the first to examine the potential for artificial light at night (ALAN) to affect the camouflage mechanisms of coastal species.
Oak McMahon, who led the research while studying for an MSc in Applied Marine Science and is now a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Plymouth, said: "This study clearly indicates that new lighting technologies will increase the conspicuousness of prey species by reducing the efficacy of their camouflage.
Our findings revealed that species of Littorinid snails found commonly on our coastlines will remain camouflaged when illuminated by older style lighting.
However, when illuminated by modern broad spectrum lighting, they are clearly visible to predators and at far greater long-term risk as a result."
Funded by the Natural Environment Research Council, this is the latest research by the University and PML to highlight the growing levels of ALAN and its impacts on coastal environments.
For this study, scientists used a well-established model to determine the conspicuousness of three distinct color morphs of Littorinid snail found commonly along the world's coastlines.
Researchers have long observed changes in brain activity associated with depression in adults, particularly in a brain area called the ventral striatum (VS), which is associated with motivation, pleasure, and goal-directed behaviors.
Similarly, several studies have shown striatal responses to rewarding experiences are blunted in adolescent children of depressed parents, which predicts later development of depression. However, more recent work shows that these brain changes can emerge long before the teenage years, when the risk for depression typically increases.
For the current study, lead author Judith Morgan, PhD, at the University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, recruited 49 children aged 6 to 8 without a history of psychiatric illness.
Half the kids' mothers had a history of clinical depression, and half had no psychiatric history. To measure reward-related brain activity, children played a video game in which they guessed which of two doors contained a hidden token while they underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
Depression may disrupt parents' capacity for emotional socialization, a process by which kids learn from their parents' reactions to their emotional responses.
Positive socialization responses include acknowledgment, imitation, and elaboration, whereas negative or emotionally dampening parental responses may be dismissive, invalidating, or punitive.
Mothers participating in the study completed an extensive questionnaire designed to measure parental emotional socialization by presenting a dozen situational vignettes of children's displays of positive emotions and collecting parents' reactions to them.
Strikingly, children with a maternal history of depression were more likely to have reduced reward-related brain activity in the VS, but only if their mothers reported less enthusiastic and more dampening responses to their children's positive emotions, the researchers found.
Children of mothers with clinical depression are at three times greater risk to develop depression themselves than are their low-risk peers.
Researchers are working to understand the neural underpinnings of the risk, and some studies have shown altered brain processing of reward in at-risk children as young as 6.
An outstanding question remains as to whether children with a maternal history of depression have a biological predisposition to blunted neural reward responding or whether it depends more on social factors. Now, new work finds those dampened responses depended on maternal feedback, suggesting the latter.
New research in mice has identified neurons in the brain that influence competitive interactions between individuals and that play a critical role in shaping the social behavior of groups.
Published in Nature by a team led by investigators at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH), the findings will be useful not only for scientists interested in human interactions but also for those who study neurocognitive conditions such as autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia that are characterized by altered social behavior.
"Social interactions in humans and animals occur most commonly in large groups, and these group interactions play a prominent role in sociology, ecology, psychology, economics and political science," says lead author S. William Li, an MD/PhD student at MGH.
What processes in the brain drive the complex dynamic behavior of social groups remains poorly understood, in part because most neuroscience research thus far has focused on the behaviors of pairs of individuals interacting alone.
Here, we were able to study the behavior of groups by developing a paradigm in which large cohorts of mice were wirelessly tracked across thousands of unique competitive group interactions.
Li and his colleagues found that the animals' social ranking in the group was closely linked to the results of competition, and by examining recordings from neurons in the brains of mice in real time, the team discovered that neurons in the anterior cingulate region of the brain store this social ranking information to inform upcoming decisions.
"Collectively, these neurons held remarkably detailed representations of the group's behavior and their dynamics as the animals competed together for food, in addition to information about the resources available and the outcome of their past interactions," explains senior author Ziv M. Williams, MD, a neurosurgical oncologist at MGH.
"Together, these neurons could even predict the animal's own future success well before competition onset, meaning that they likely drove the animals' competitive behavior based on whom they interacted with."
Manipulating the activity of these neurons, on the other hand, could artificially increase or decrease an animal's competitive effort and therefore control their ability to successfully compete against others. "In other words, we could tune up and down the animal's competitive drive and do so selectively without affecting other aspects of their behavior such as simple speed or motivation," says Williams.
The findings indicate that competitive success is not simply a product of an animal's physical fitness or strength, but rather, is strongly influenced by signals in the brain that affect competitive drive.
"These unique neurons are able to integrate information about the individual's environment, social group settings, and reward resources to calculate how to best behave under specific conditions," says Li.
In addition to providing insights into group behavior and competition in different sociologic or economic situations and other settings, identifying the neurons that control these characteristics may help scientists design experiments to better understand scenarios in which the brain is wired differently.
"Many conditions manifest in aberrant social behavior that spans many dimensions, including one's ability to understand social norms and to display actions that may fit the dynamical structure of social groups," says Williams.
"Developing an understanding of group behavior and competition holds relevance to these neurocognitive disorders, but until now, how this happens in the brain has largely remained unexplored."
The setup looks like something out of a low-budget sci-fi film: one wall of the container is lined with thousands of LEDs, an inscrutable metal trellis runs down the center, and a thick black curtain partially obscures the apparatus.
This is the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory solar simulator, a tool that can shine with the intensity of 20 Suns. On Thursday afternoon, Benkoski mounted a small black-and-white tile onto the trellis and pulled a dark curtain around the setup before stepping out of the shipping container. Then he hit the light switch.
Once the solar simulator was blistering hot, Benkoski started pumping liquid helium through a small embedded tube that snaked across the slab. The helium absorbed heat from the LEDs as it wound through the channel and expanded until it was finally released through a small nozzle.
It might not sound like much, but Benkoski and his team just demonstrated solar thermal propulsion, a previously theoretical type of rocket engine that is powered by the Sun’s heat. They think it could be the key to interstellar exploration.
“It’s really easy for someone to dismiss the idea and say, ‘On the back of an envelope, it looks great, but if you actually build it, you're never going to get those theoretical numbers,’” says Benkoski
materials scientist at the Applied Physics Laboratory and the leader of the team working on a solar thermal propulsion system. “What this is showing is that solar thermal propulsion is not just a fantasy. It could actually work.”
Only two spacecraft, Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, have left our Solar System. But that was a scientific bonus after they completed their main mission to explore Jupiter and Saturn.
Neither spacecraft was equipped with the right instruments to study the boundary between our star’s planetary fiefdom and the rest of the universe. Plus, the Voyager twins are slow. Plodding along at 30,000 miles per hour, it took them nearly a half-century to escape the Sun’s influence.
But the data they have sent back from the edge is tantalizing. It showed that much of what physicists had predicted about the environment at the edge of the Solar System was wrong.
Unsurprisingly, a large group of astrophysicists, cosmologists, and planetary scientists are clamoring for a dedicated interstellar probe to explore this new frontier.
In 2019, NASA tapped the Applied Physics Laboratory to study concepts for a dedicated interstellar mission. At the end of next year, the team will submit its research to the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s Heliophysics decadal survey, which determines Sun-related science priorities for the next 10 years.
APL researchers working on the Interstellar Probe program are studying all aspects of the mission, from cost estimates to instrumentation. But simply figuring out how to get to interstellar space in any reasonable amount of time is by far the biggest and most important piece of the puzzle.
The edge of the Solar System—called the heliopause—is extremely far away. By the time a spacecraft reaches Pluto, it’s only a third of the way to interstellar space. And the APL team is studying a probe that would go three times farther than the edge of the Solar System, a journey of 50 billion miles, in about half the time it took the Voyager spacecraft just to reach the edge.
To pull off that type of mission, they’ll need a probe unlike anything that’s ever been built. “We want to make a spacecraft that will go faster, further, and get closer to the Sun than anything has ever done before,” says Benkoski. “It’s like the hardest thing you could possibly do.”
In mid-November, the Interstellar Probe researchers met online for a weeklong conference to share updates as the study enters its final year. At the conference, teams from APL and NASA shared the results of their work on solar thermal propulsion, which they believe is the fastest way to get a probe into interstellar space.
The idea is to power a rocket engine with heat from the Sun, rather than combustion. According to Benkoski’s calculations, this engine would be around three times more efficient than the best conventional chemical engines available today.
“From a physics standpoint, it’s hard for me to imagine anything that’s going to beat solar thermal propulsion in terms of efficiency,” says Benkoski. “But can you keep it from exploding?”
Unlike a conventional engine mounted on the aft end of a rocket, the solar thermal engine that the researchers are studying would be integrated with the spacecraft’s shield. The rigid flat shell is made from a black carbon foam with one side coated in a white reflective material.
Externally, it would look very similar to the heat shield on the Parker Solar Probe. The critical difference is the tortuous pipeline hidden just beneath the surface.
If the interstellar probe makes a close pass by the Sun and pushes hydrogen into its shield’s vasculature, the hydrogen will expand and explode from a nozzle at the end of the pipe. The heat shield will generate thrust.
It’s simple in theory but incredibly hard in practice. A solar thermal rocket is only effective if it can pull off an Oberth maneuver, an orbital-mechanics hack that turns the Sun into a giant slingshot.
The Sun’s gravity acts like a force multiplier that dramatically increases the craft’s speed if a spacecraft fires its engines as it loops around the star.
The closer a spacecraft gets to the Sun during an Oberth maneuver, the faster it will go. In APL’s mission design, the interstellar probe would pass just a million miles from the Sun’s roiling surface.
To put this in perspective, by the time NASA’s Parker Solar Probe makes its closest approach in 2025, it will be within 4 million miles of the Sun’s surface and booking it at nearly 430,000 miles per hour.
That’s about twice the speed the interstellar probe aims to hit, and the Parker Solar Probe built up speed with gravity assists from the Sun and Venus over the course of seven years.
The Interstellar Probe will have to accelerate from around 30,000 miles per hour to around 200,000 miles per hour in a single shot around the Sun, which means getting close to the star. Really close.
Cozying up to a Sun-sized thermonuclear explosion creates all sorts of materials challenges, says Dean Cheikh, a materials technologist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory who presented a case study on the solar thermal rocket during the recent conference. For the APL mission, the probe would spend around 2.5 hours in temperatures around 4,500 degrees Fahrenheit as it completed its Oberth maneuver.
That’s more than hot enough to melt through the Parker Solar Probe’s heat shield, so Cheikh’s team at NASA found new materials that could be coated on the outside to reflect away thermal energy.
Combined with the cooling effect of hydrogen flowing through channels in the heat shield, these coatings would keep the interstellar probe cool while it blitzed by the Sun.
“You want to maximize the amount of energy that you’re kicking back,” says Cheikh. “Even small differences in material reflectivity start to heat up your spacecraft significantly.”
A still greater problem is how to handle the hot hydrogen flowing through the channels. At extremely high temperatures, the hydrogen would eat right through the carbon-based core of the heat shield, which means the inside of the channels will have to be coated in a stronger material.
The team identified a few materials that could do the job, but there’s just not a lot of data on their performance, especially extreme temperatures. “There’s not a lot of materials that can fill these demands,” says Cheikh. “In some ways that’s good, because we only have to look at these materials. But it’s also bad because we don’t have a lot of options.”
The big takeaway from his research, says Cheikh, is there’s a lot of testing that needs to be done on heat shield materials before a solar thermal rocket is sent around the Sun. But it’s not a deal-breaker.
In fact, incredible advances in materials science make the idea finally seem feasible more than 60 years after it was first conceived by engineers in the US Air Force. “I thought I came up with this great idea independently, but people were talking about it in 1956,” says Benkoski.
“Additive manufacturing is a key component of this, and we couldn’t do that 20 years ago. Now I can 3D-print metal in the lab.”
Even if Benkoski wasn’t the first to float the idea of a solar thermal propulsion, he believes he’s the first to demonstrate a prototype engine. During his experiments with the channeled tile in the shipping container, Benkoski and his team showed that it was possible to generate thrust using sunlight to heat a gas as it passed through embedded ducts in a heat shield.
These experiments had several limitations. They didn’t use the same materials or propellant that would be used on an actual mission, and the tests occurred at temperatures well below what an interstellar probe would experience.
But the important thing, says Benkoski, is that the data from the low-temperature experiments matched the models that predict how an interstellar probe would perform on its actual mission once adjustments are made for the different materials.
“We did it on a system that would never actually fly. And now the second step is we start to substitute each of these components with the stuff that you would put on a real spacecraft for an Oberth maneuver,” Benkoski says.
The concept has a long way to go before it’s ready to be used on a mission—and with only a year left in the Interstellar Probe study, there’s not enough time to launch a small satellite to do experiments in low Earth orbit.
But by the time Benkoski and his colleagues at APL submit their report next year, they will have generated a wealth of data that lays the foundation for in-space tests.
There’s no guarantee that the National Academies will select the interstellar-probe concept as a top priority for the coming decade. But whenever we are ready to leave the Sun behind, there’s a good chance we’ll have to use it for a boost on our way out the door.
Above the ad, the FBI implores readers to contact the agency. “The information provided to the FBI by the public is the most effective means of combating threats.
If you have information that could help the FBI, please contact us,” it says. The ad links to the Washington field office’s counterintelligence program, encouraging visitors to “visit us in person” and saying that “the information you provide will be handled in a confidential manner, and our interactions with you will be professional and respectful.”
Lapp told the Post that the ads will probably have Russian counterintelligence officials working overtime to determine whether any of the country’s spies or diplomats visited the site or the FBI’s field office.
“Russian counterintelligence officers are currently in an all-hands-on-deck mode to make sure their folks don’t stray and that they are keeping an eye on their own officers to make sure that no one goes rogue,” he said.
“This will probably cause those folks to work even harder than they are already working, and they may end up chasing ghosts, things that aren’t there, and spend time doing this. That in and of itself is a counterintelligence success for the FBI.”
When Russian troops first streamed across the Belarusian border into Ukraine for what they had assumed would be a lightning assault on Kyiv, they were intending to rely on the region’s extensive rail network for supplies and reinforcements.
Starting in the earliest days of the invasion in February, a clandestine network of railway workers, hackers and dissident security forces went into action to disable or disrupt the railway links connecting Russia to Ukraine through Belarus, wreaking havoc on Russian supply lines.
The attacks have drawn little attention outside Belarus amid the drama of the Russian onslaught and the bloody aftermath of Russia’s humiliating retreat. Fierce Ukrainian resistance and tactical errors by an ill-prepared Russian force were likely enough to thwart Russia’s plans, analysts say.
But the Belarus railway saboteurs can at least claim a role in fueling the logistical chaos that quickly engulfed the Russians, leaving troops stranded on the front lines without food, fuel and ammunition within days of the invasion.
Alexander Kamyshin, head of Ukrainian railways, expressed Ukraine’s gratitude to the Belarusian saboteurs. “They are brave and honest people who have helped us,” he said.
The attacks were simple but effective, targeting the signal control cabinets essential to the functioning of the railways, members of the activist network said. For days on end, the movement of trains was paralyzed, forcing the Russians to attempt to resupply their troops by road and contributing to the snarl-up that stalled the infamous 40-mile military convoy north of Kyiv.
How much of the chaos can be attributed to the sabotage and how much to poor logistical planning by the Russians is hard to tell, especially as there is no independent media reporting from Belarus, said Emily Ferris, a research fellow at the London-based Royal United Services Institute.
But without automated signaling, trains were forced to slow to a crawl and the number of them traveling on the tracks at any one time would have been severely restricted, she said.
“Given the Russian reliance on trains, I’m sure it contributed to some of the problems they had in the north. It would have slowed down their ability to move,” she said. “They couldn’t push further into Ukrainian territory and snarled their supply lines because they had to rely on trucks.”
The attacks also bought time for Ukrainian troops to formulate an effective response to the Russian invasion, said Yury Ravavoi, a Belarusian activist and trade unionist who escaped to Poland under threat of arrest during the anti-government protests that rocked Belarus in 2020. “I can’t say we were the most important factor, but we were an important brick in the wall,” he said.
The saboteurs drew inspiration from an earlier episode in Belarusian history, during World War II, when Belarusians opposed to the Nazi occupation blew up railway lines and train stations to disrupt German supply lines.
The Rail War, as it is known, is venerated as a moment of triumph for Belarus, taught in schools as the most successful of the tactics deployed by resistance fighters that eased the way for Soviet troops to drive the Germans out.
Eight decades later, it is Russia’s presence in Belarus that has stirred dissent. The deployment of tens of thousands of Russian troops in Belarus in preparation for the invasion of Ukraine triggered widespread domestic opposition and rekindled opposition networks formed during the 2020 protests against Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko, said Hanna Liubakova, a Belarusian journalist living in exile in Lithuania.
This second Rail War has taken a more benign form than its predecessor. The partisans were keen not to inflict casualties, Ravavoi said. So they focused their attacks on damaging equipment to stop the railways from functioning.
He and other Belarusians involved in organizing the attacks decline to reveal precise details of how the attacks were carried out and by whom, citing the need for secrecy and concerns for the safety of the railway partisans, as the saboteurs are loosely known.
Three main groups have been involved, representing railway workers, security force defectors and cyber specialists, said Lt. Col Alexander Azarov, a former security official living in Warsaw who heads the security force group called Bypol.
Railway employees sympathetic to the partisans have leaked details of Russian movements and the locations of key railway infrastructure to a group called the Community of Railway Workers, which shares them on Telegram channels. Supporters on the ground link up to carry out the attacks, but there is no formal chain of command, Azarov said.
“Our movement is not centralized,” he said. “It’s not like there’s a leader of the resistance. It’s horizontal, with dozens of groups working on the ground.” The third group, the Cyber Partisans, is formed of exiled Belarusian IT professionals who have carried out several cyberattacks on the Belarusian government since joining in 2020.
The Cyber Partisans launched the first attack, hacking into the railway’s computer network in the days leading up to the invasion and snarling rail traffic before Russian troops had even crossed the border.
Infiltrating the railway network’s computers was relatively easy, said Yuliana Shemetovets, a spokesperson for the group who is based in New York, because the railway company is still using Windows XP, an outdated version of the software that contains many vulnerabilities.
Starting on Feb. 26, two days after the invasion began, a succession of five sabotage attacks against signaling cabinets brought train traffic to an almost complete halt, said Sergey Voitekhovich, a former railway employee now based in Poland who is a leader in the Community of Railway Workers.
By Feb. 28, satellite photographs began to appear of the 40-mile convoy of Russian trucks and tanks ostensibly headed from Belarus toward Kyiv. Within a week, the convoy had completely stalled as vehicles ran out of fuel or broke down.
The Belarusian authorities have since launched an intense effort to prevent attacks and hunt down the saboteurs. The Interior Ministry has decreed that damaging railway infrastructure is an act of terrorism, a crime that carries a 20-year prison term.
Dozens of railway workers have been randomly detained and their phones searched for evidence that they were in touch with the partisans, the activists say. At least 11 Belarusians are in custody, accused of participating in the attacks, according to human rights groups.
In early April, security police captured three alleged saboteurs near the town of Bobruisk and shot them in the knees. State television broadcast footage of the bleeding men, their knees bandaged, and claimed they had been shot while resisting arrest.
The shootings have had a chilling effect on the saboteur network, Azarov said. Belarusian troops are patrolling and drones have been deployed to monitor the railway lines. “It has become too dangerous to do attacks,” he said.
But by the time of the police shooting, Russia’s withdrawal from the area around Kyiv was in full swing and the Kremlin had announced it would refocus its military effort on capturing the east of Ukraine. The majority of the Russian troops that entered Ukraine from Belarus are now in the process of being redeployed to the east, the Pentagon says.
“We believe the fact that the Russians gave up on taking Kyiv is a result of our work because the Russians didn’t feel as safe in Belarus as they had expected,” said Franak Viacorka, spokesman for Belarusian opposition leader Svetlana Tikhanovskaya. “Thousands of Russian troops didn’t receive food, they didn’t receive fuel, and they didn’t receive equipment on time.”
Now, a new phase in the rail war may be underway. In recent days the railway activists have posted on Telegram photographs of damage to signaling cabinets along Russian railway lines being used to transport troops into eastern Ukraine. The attacks can’t be independently confirmed, but Voitekhovich claimed members of his railway network are involved. “There are open borders between Belarus and Russia,” he said.
Rachel, 25, has the open face and friendly demeanor of a born-and-bred Midwesterner. She’s lively and opinionated, and feels in control of most areas of her life. But when it comes to sex, something isn’t right.
“I don’t know," she sighed over coffee as we spoke in downtown D.C. "I’ve never been in a situation where I felt pushed into something, exactly, but…”
Rachel (a pseudonym) reeled off a list of unhappy encounters with would-be romantic partners: sex consented to out of a misguided sense of politeness, extreme acts requested and occasionally allowed, degrading insults as things unfolded — and regrets later. “It’s not like I was being forced into anything or that I feel unsafe, but it’s not … good. And I don’t like how I feel afterwards.”
Young Americans are engaging in sexual encounters they don’t really want for reasons they don’t fully agree with. It’s a depressing state of affairs — turbocharged by pornography, which has mainstreamed ever more extreme sexual acts, and the proliferation of dating apps, which can make it seem as though new options are around every corner.
The results are widely felt. Many of my contemporaries are discouraged by the romantic landscape, its lack of trust, emotion and commitment, but they also believe that safer options and smoother avenues aren’t possible. Instead, they assume that this is how things go and that it would be unreasonable to ask for more — and rude not to go along with whatever has been requested.
In our post-sexual-revolution culture, there seems to be wide agreement among young adults that sex is good and the more of it we have, the better. That assumption includes the idea that we don’t need to be tied to a relationship or marriage; that our proclivities are personal and that they are not to be judged by others — not even by participants. In this landscape, there is only one rule: Get consent from your partner beforehand.
But the outcome is a world in which young people are both liberated and miserable. While college scandals and the #MeToo moment may have cemented a baseline rule for how to get into bed with someone without crossing legal lines, that hasn’t made the experience of dating and finding a partner simple or satisfying. Instead, the experience is often sad, unsettling, even traumatic.
As Rachel told me: “Every single person I know — every woman I know — has had some questionable encounter, whether it was, like, really violent or really forceful or just kind of like, ‘Oh, I hated that. That was not fun.’”
These are typically encounters that adults have entered into willingly, in part because consent alone is the standard for good and ethical sex. But the experiences that many young people described to me sound neither ethical nor particularly good.
When the covid-19 pandemic briefly pressed pause on our overheated social lives, many young adults suddenly had time to reflect on their experiences and desires: what we really want from dating, sex and relationships, and what we want and expect from each other. Today, as we make our way back into the world, we need a new ethic — because consent is not enough.
Even when it goes well, sex is complicated. It involves our bodies, minds and emotions, our connections to each other and our deepest selves. Despite the (many, and popular) arguments that it’s only a physical act, it is clear to almost anyone who has had it that sex has vast consequences, some of which can last long after an encounter ends.
Over the past several decades, our society has come to believe that consent — as a legal standard and a moral requirement — could somehow make our most unruly activity more manageable. But it was never going to be that easy.
To be fair, it’s taken a great deal of effort even to get to the place where consent is considered a baseline requirement for ethical sex.
The earliest rape laws reflected the historically common view that women were the property of a father or husband whose honor might be harmed. Even as laws were slowly rewritten to recognize rape as a crime against the woman herself, the burden remained on the woman to prove her truthfulness, chastity and resistance to attack — making cases extraordinarily difficult to prosecute in the minority of cases when women came forward.
In the 1970s, second-wave feminists organized speak-outs, hosted forums and established rape crisis centers, drawing attention to the pervasiveness of sexual assault and violence against women. Still, change came slowly.
Laws that protected husbands from being prosecuted for sexual violence against their wives remained on the books in 2019. Donald Trump won the presidential election in 2016 even after audio emerged of him bragging about grabbing women by their genitals.
“No means no” was a radical slogan when it was first popularized in the 1990s. And the idea of affirmative consent — getting verbal permission clearly and often during a sexual encounter — was considered even more radical when it was implemented in 1991 at Antioch College, a tiny liberal arts school in Ohio.
In 1993, “Saturday Night Live” mocked it with a game-show skit featuring sex-hating “victimization studies” majors; comedian Dave Chappelle was still roasting the idea of a “love contract” in 2004.
And yet, by the 2010s, the preferred consensus had moved away from “no means no” and coalesced around “yes means yes.” California enacted a law of the same name in 2014. This phrase, and the accompanying idea of “affirmative consent,” made clear that the absence of a “no” didn’t constitute agreement to anything; an active “yes” was needed, too. “Yes” as the standard would ideally make the act of giving consent an informed, empowering exchange. Or at least, that was the idea.
More recently, sex educators have moved toward the “enthusiastic” formulation of consent. This approach, which has become received wisdom on college campuses, tries to distinguish between wanted and unwanted sex, and encompasses both agency and desire.
Again, the goal is to remove ambiguity, but it sets the bar higher. “If it’s not a f--- yes,” as social media influencer Serena Kerrigan proclaims to her 150,000 Instagram followers, mostly young women in their 20s, “it’s a f--- no.”
But even this more modern definition does not seem to have substantially reduced the unhappiness among many sexually active men and women. The same complaints and confusions abound. What if one party hopes for a future together and the other does not?
What counts as a relationship, and what is “casual,” if the definition isn’t mutually shared? If men and women have different fertility timelines, does that affect the power dynamic? Where does money play in, or status?
Even the qualified versions of consent — the “affirmative,” the “enthusiastic” — have the lowest possible standard as their working assumption: “Did I get permission, so that my actions are not statedly against this person’s will?” The new adjectives are often understood as simply shifting the goal posts — rather than stopping when your partner says “no,” you just have to get them to say “yes” in the right way.
The problem with all this is that consent is a legal criterion, not an ethical one. It doesn’t tell us how we should treat each other as an interaction continues. It doesn’t provide a good road map should something go off the rails.
And it suggests that individual actions — “ask for consent,” “speak your mind,” “be more forceful in saying yes or no” — are enough to preempt the misunderstandings and hurt that can come with physical intimacy.
Too often, they’re just not. And setting consent as the highest bar for any encounter effectively takes a pass on the harder questions: whether that consent was fairly obtained; whether it can ever fully convey what our partners really, ultimately want; whether we should be doing what we’ve gotten consent to do.
More clarifications of consent — or ever-more-technical breakdowns of its different forms — won’t rebalance power differentials, explain intimacy or teach us how to care. Making the standard of consent our sole criterion for good sex punts on the question of how to conduct a relationship that affirms our fundamental personhood and human dignity.
And an overreliance on consent as the sole solution might actually worsen the malaise that so many people feel: If you’re playing by the rules and everything still feels awful, what are you supposed to conclude?
The forced isolation of the pandemic, and the attempts that many people made to work around it, put an unexpected lens on modern-day intimacy. The vast array of dating apps has skewed our sense of what is acceptable and what is not by dangling the prospect of another, better match merely a swipe away.
Meanwhile, millennials and Gen Z are the first generations to have entered puberty with easy access to pornography via the Internet — often easier access than they had to genuine sex education. By 2019, Pornhub — which had launched only a dozen years earlier — averaged 115 million visits per day, nearly the equivalent of the combined populations of Australia, Canada, the Netherlands and Poland.
The most readily accessible kind of pornography — aggressive and hardcore, shot from the male perspective, with women existing to give men pleasure and not much else — has mainstreamed acts (choking, anal sex and outright violence) that used to be rarer.
The ubiquity of pornography also means that growing numbers of women are interacting with porn-addled men who either disregard their desires or who don’t understand how to interact with a fellow human being as opposed to an avatar on a screen.
Consider what Kaitlin, 30, told me at a party. “I’ve been going on dates with this guy who I really like.” It’s the winter of 2019 — the pre-pandemic era, when single urbanites still crushed up against each other in crowded apartments, trading complaints and advice over mediocre beers. “But he chokes me during sex?”
Kaitlin (also a pseudonym) wasn’t sure whether to say anything, or even if it could be considered a valid problem. After all, moments like this had happened to lots of her friends. And in the moment, she had said yes.
She then asked me — a complete stranger — to tell her how she was supposed to feel. “I mean, what do you think? Is that okay?” My immediate thought was that of course it wasn’t. She had felt pushed to do something that she didn’t want to do, and she should be honest with her partner and herself. Her discomfort was valid. That she felt the need to ask a stranger for confirmation felt disturbing — and sad.
Yet I understood her hesitancy. Early in the #MeToo movement, many commenters argued that women should simply get better at saying no, at withholding their consent and exiting uncomfortable situations.
There’s some truth to that. But it also felt like yet another burden placed on women: to be gatekeepers, whose comfort and safety were predicated on having the right level of self-confidence and self-possession even in their most vulnerable moments. What about those of us who are not always perfectly self-assured?
And making the issue “being firm about consent” sidesteps a critical question about what our standards should be. There are some sexual practices — Kaitlin’s surprise choking encounter among them — that eroticize dehumanization and degradation, ones for which the issue should not be whether they are consented to but whether they’re ethically valid at all.
Instead, “between two consenting adults” has become a stock phrase, a conversational yield sign indicating that whatever is detailed next might raise eyebrows but remains beyond critique. This obscures the fact that not all sex is the same. Some things are worse than others. Yet the bias toward acceptance makes it difficult to say so, even when something feels obviously wrong.
And when we do object to a particular act or practice, there isn’t language to do so. Since we have made it effectively impossible for anything apart from nonconsent to be wrong, we end up framing issues in that prevailing standard — the consent given wasn’t the right kind, we say: It wasn’t verbally affirmative or visibly enthusiastic. There’s no clear way to talk about the underlying problems of sexual acts agreed to in order to “be polite,” to please a pushy partner or to avoid something worse.
This is the problem with consent: It leaves so much out. Nonconsensual sex is always wrong, full stop. But that doesn’t mean consensual sex is always right. Even sex that is agreed to can be harmful to an individual, their partner or to society at large.
As a society, we tend to shy away from declaring certain behaviors intrinsically wrong, or right, or uncomfortably in between. The focus on consent has — perhaps inadvertently — allowed us to dodge difficult questions about morality, autonomy and what our sexual culture ought to look like.
But that low-bar formulation doesn’t begin to cover the complications that arise in modern-day dating and mating. And the gap between what young people want the sexual landscape to look like and what the consent paradigm offers is turning many off of sex entirely, as evidenced by falling rates of sexual activity, partnership and marriage — some have dubbed this the “sex recession” — that recently hit a 30-year low.
One woman told me that at the age of 34 she had “just stopped thinking a relationship is even possible.” Rather than expanding our happiness, liberation seems to have shrunk it.
I met a lot of Rachels and Kaitlins, failed by our current sexual protocols. And I heard from men, too, that the current culture was less to their liking than one might guess.
In their experience, the pressure to say “yes” feels more like a pressure not to say “no” — to live up to the “callous womanizer” stereotype that the low bar of consent culture still seemed to allow. This pressure, they said, made it harder to pursue the real connection many of them desired.
And at the same time, a lack of clear norms apart from consent contributed to an underlying level of anxiety and uncertainty — you know enough not to be Harvey Weinstein, but what if you end up canceled like West Elm Caleb? — making even low-stakes interactions feel more and more out of reach. As one therapist told me: “Men in their twenties are terrified, and they talk about it a lot.”
I asked many of these people what a better sexual world might look like. “Listening,” I heard. “Care,” they said. “Mutual responsibility,” some suggested. Or, as one woman plaintively put it: “Can we not just love each other for a single day?”
That question points to what looks to me like a good answer. The word “love” tends to conjure ideas of flowers, chocolate, declarations of undying devotion. But the term has a longer, more helpful history.
Thomas Aquinas, the 13th-century philosopher and theologian, defined love as “willing the good of the other.” He borrowed that definition from Aristotle, who talked about love as an intention to bear goodwill toward another for the sake of that person and not oneself.
Willing the good means caring enough about another person to consider how your actions (and their consequences) might affect them — and then choosing not to act if the outcome would be negative.
It’s mutual concern — thinking about someone other than yourself and then working so their experience is as good as you hope yours to be. It’s taking responsibility for navigating interactions that might seem ambiguous, rather than using that ambiguity to excuse self-serving “misunderstandings.”
In practice, this would mean that we have to think about the differentials in power that come with age, gender, experience, intoxication level and expectations of commitment, especially when clothes come off.
This new ethic would also acknowledge that sex is likely to be something different and more substantial than we want or expect it to be. This makes it our responsibility to make a good-faith bet on what the good actually is — and what just might be a bad idea.
There are many situations in which a partner might consent to sex — affirmatively, even enthusiastically — but in which sex would still be ethically wrong. In general, “willing the good of the other” is most often realized in restraint — in inaction rather than action.
This involves a certain level of maturity and self-knowledge on all our parts: an understanding that if we aren’t able to manage this level of consideration — in the moment or more broadly — we probably shouldn’t be having sex. And, yes, it might lead to less casual sex, not more.
It’s a much higher standard than consent. But consent was always the floor — it never should have been the ceiling.
I feel unsettled when I stream music on Spotify. Maybe you feel that way, too. Even though it has all the music I’ve ever wanted, none of it feels necessarily rewarding, emotional, or personal. I pay a nominal fee for this privilege, knowing that essentially none of it will reach the artists I am listening to.
I have unfettered access to an abundance of songs I genuinely love, along with an abundance of great songs I’ve never heard before, but I can’t shake the eerie feeling that the options before me are almost too perfect.
I have personalized my experience enough to feel like this is my music, but I know that’s not really true—it’s simply a fabricated reality meant to replace the random contours of life outside the app.
The truth is that if you’re using Spotify, Apple Music, Tidal, or any other streaming service, you’re not paying for music so much as the opportunity to witness the potential of music. Music becomes an advertisement for the streaming service, and the more time and attention you give it, the more it benefits the tech company, not necessarily the music ecosystem.
In Spotify, each song’s play count is prominently displayed, in effect gamifying the music industry so that tracks tacitly compete against one another inside the app. They even go so far as to turn the amount of time you spend in their app into a badge of honor during their annual year-end promotional campaigns.
So you’re in the top percentile of Big Thief listeners? That’s not just a measure of your love for an artist’s music, but also a reflection of the time spent enriching the value of a company.
In addition to co-opting corporate social media strategies to benefit from the attention economy, tech companies have inherently made songs fleeting, cheap, and sometimes intrusive, corrupting the cultural exchange between artist and listener.
Music is now leased to you through a secret system that you don’t understand, by a company with which you should have no emotional connection.
Instead of simply buying a physical product or even pirating music from Napster—both of which created uniquely personal libraries of songs that helped define the identities of a generation—millions of users now sit side by side at the ledge of one great big trough of recorded music for the monthly price of a Chipotle burrito.
There have been many passionate and excoriating essays written about how streaming services have short-changed artists with minuscule payouts. But as the reviews editor of this music publication, I find myself asking: What does a platform like Spotify afford the most engaged music fans and what are the lingering effects of its use?
As the independent musician and writer Damon Krukowski once wrote, there are alternative and radical solutions to combat the upstreaming of profits and homogenization of sound that the streaming era has come to stand for.
But as one of nearly half a billion people who pay a small fee to rent the vast majority of the history of recorded music—not to mention the 2 billion people per month who use YouTube for free—I have found that, after more than a decade under the influence, it has begun to reshape my relationship with music. I’m addicted to a relationship that I know is very bad for me.
I know I am addicted to Spotify the same way I was addicted to nicotine or Twitter. It makes me happy, aggrieved, needlessly defensive. Oh, you boycott Spotify and only buy CDs on Bandcamp? Good for you. I use Spotify every day for hours on end, when I’m working, at the gym, running, when I want to put some music on while making dinner, when I go to sleep.
I write off part of my Spotify use as a hazard of my job, but I just can’t get enough of that sweet streaming asbestos outside of work, too. Even though I buy a fair amount of records every year, Spotify is my main delivery system for music. It’s like being hooked on rolling papers or the yellowed smell of a casino—not the actual vice itself.
The ease, the look, the familiarity—I’m addicted to the emotional labor it does for me when its “Radio” feature instantly creates a playlist of songs that kind of sound like, say, “Breakdown” by Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers while I’m sitting outside on a nice afternoon. It loosely organizes what I love and what I might love and, for the most part, it’s absolutely correct.
I’ve sometimes rationalized that it is not an unhealthy addiction: I use Spotify in a way that reflects who I am, I bend it to my whims. For the last 10 years, I have kept playlists of favorite songs—both old and new—I discovered each year, a living record of growth and change in taste.
I listen to weekly playlists that are made by friends and colleagues and artists, silently connecting with their interests. I’m going beyond the algorithm, operating at a higher frequency, clipping between the walls that cannot contain my taste profile.
The seeds of this addiction were planted in the late 2000s, when the music industry was struggling to adapt to the new digital era, unsure of how to wrap a tourniquet around the vast hemorrhaging of money caused by such a fast-moving paradigm shift.
The streaming era as we know it began in an unlikely place, with good intentions: On October 10, 2007, Radiohead released In Rainbows and allowed fans to pay what they wanted for its digital files. After 1.2 million downloads, the average price paid per album was $2.26. Case studies in setting a new market price don’t come in a tidier package than this.
But as free-market and egalitarian as it was, the experiment was meant to motivate fans to go out and buy an actual physical copy of the album. Devised by Radiohead’s managers Bryce Edge and Chris Hufford while they were “a bit stoned,” the pay-what-you-want stunt was a means to an end: “If we didn’t believe that when people hear the music, they will want to buy the CD, we wouldn’t do what we are doing,”
Edge said at the time. A lot of Radiohead fans did buy the album when it came out—it sold 122,000 copies in America alone in its first week—but by then, the downloaders outnumbered them by a wide margin. So even though Thom Yorke later described Spotify as “the last desperate fart of a dying corpse,” his band all but invented the model of what would become the streaming era: turning music into an ad that you pay very little for, with no real incentive to go and buy what it is advertising.
Another important shift was happening in 2007. Seeing the writing on the wall, several high-profile artists were abandoning their longtime major labels to find other avenues of distribution: Madonna left Warner to sign with touring giant Live Nation, a bellwether of where the real money was being made in the industry. (JAY-Z would make a similar move the following year.)
Nine Inch Nails left music mogul Jimmy Iovine’s label Interscope and independently put out an instrumental album, Ghosts I-IV; by Trent Reznor’s estimation, the collection made millions more than it would have had they released it with the label.
Into this stew of major label woes—which included the lingering piracy boogeyman—came Spotify. Launched in 2008, the streaming start-up was a direct attempt to both stem piracy and circumvent anti-piracy laws in its native Sweden.
In addition to offering a way for online listeners to legally play music, Spotify acquired its user base in markets around the globe because of how easy it was to use. No more paying per song on iTunes, no more navigating the murky waters of P2P servers, no more waiting for albums to download. Here, finally, was a solution: legal music, a lot of it, right now, for cheap.
After officially launching in the U.S. in 2011, Spotify quickly turned into a potential panacea for everything that was ailing the music industry. Two years later, newspapers were asking: Can Spotify Save the Music Industry? A race to market dominance ensued.
By 2014, Reznor had mended fences with Iovine and became the chief creative officer of Iovine’s new streaming platform, Beats Music, which wanted to set itself apart from competitors like Spotify and Pandora. Instead of an algorithmic platform that served you what you wanted, its team of curators would provide you with a more human experience.
Iovine saw that, through artist and influencer-created playlists, you could confer taste, status, and criticism—the stuff that the former record-buying public supposedly pined for. One of Iovine’s maxims at the time: Access is average; curation is everything. Seeing the promise of a more bespoke streaming experience, Apple bought Beats for $3 billion and relaunched the service as Apple Music in 2015.
That same year, JAY-Z stood on a stage with Madonna, Rihanna, Daft Punk, Kanye West, and several other A-list musicians to announce the artist-majority-owned service Tidal, with “a mission to re-establish the value of music.”
Touting hi-fi streaming and better payouts for artists, Tidal seemed like a much-needed counterweight to Apple Music and Spotify. Finally, here was a platform not funded by Silicon Valley VCs but by (admittedly already wealthy) musicians who understood the art and work that goes into the process of creation.
But since its launch, its growth has lagged dramatically behind its competitors. Last year, JAY-Z sold the majority of Tidal to Square, a mobile payment company owned by Twitter founder Jack Dorsey.
Each successive introduction of a new tech company into the streaming era sought to solve a problem created by the digital era: pirating, the devaluation of music, and the lack of human connections music once relied upon. At this point, music piracy has generally been on the decline for five years.
Major labels have plugged the holes in their coffers by licensing the vast majority of their music to streaming services and meting out payouts to their signees.
The exception has always been the independent-minded Bandcamp, which includes a Radiohead-style pay-what-you-want option at a record’s point of sale, and fosters holistic connection between musicians and listeners through hubs run by labels and artists. Earlier this year, Bandcamp was acquired by the software company Epic Games.
Much like social media, the streaming era has created a simulation of real life. Each company uses its technology to digitize and replace the analog practice of buying, listening, and connecting to music, all while capitalizing on the nostalgia of those activities.
The seamlessness of the experience—the ease with which one song bleeds into the next, and the buffet of decisions laid before you on Spotify’s home screen—creates an artificial scarcity out of vast abundance.
For me, it has caused a kind of nagging depersonalization, an experience so divergent from, say, holding an album in my hands, or being in a record store, that I feel like a little bit of a hack every time I open the app. But I also understand that for the majority of subscribers, this simulation of a beautiful, vibrant, limitless music industry is possibly all they could ever want.
Let’s say there are three general categories of music listeners: Passive, Auxiliary, and Intentional. Most of the world falls into the Passive category, absorbing music like inhaling oxygen: without much thought at all.
For them, there is either music playing, or maybe it’s not music playing, who can be sure? There is perhaps little to no interrogation into why any sound is floating down from the speakers at the grocery store; it simply exists at the same megahertz as the shopping cart and the fluorescent lights and the cereal selection.
Songs are liked and not liked, if they are thought about at all, and the whole relationship is pure and elegant. The second is the Auxiliary listener, someone for whom music enhances a primary experience to make it more interesting.
Common forms of auxiliary listening involve music accompanying a visual stimulus, like film scores or needle drops in movies, music videos or their modern-day equivalent: a song snippet looped in a TikTok.
But the Auxiliary listener chiefly uses music as a utility: to relax, to work, to go to the gym, to get drunk, to do drugs, to have sex, to dance, to fall asleep. Music is not your life, but what was playing while you lived it.
The last is the Intentional listener, someone who chooses to listen to music for the pleasure of it in and of itself. This is admittedly the tiniest category of people, a subset that spends a remarkable amount of time listening to albums, mixtapes, DJ sets, and playlists without distraction.
They are purposeful about what they select and why—for them, there is a pleasure to be found in the flow of listening to music and the emotional, intellectual, and biographical response that it creates untethered to anything but the chemical responses in the brain. Some of these people use drugs to enhance this connection, but not all of them. Music, for these people, is life.
It’s important to make these distinctions because I believe that, for Passive and Auxiliary listeners—again, the vast majority of people in the world—Spotify and the streaming era writ large have achieved an ideal compromise.
The technology has made accessible what had previously been difficult or kept behind the gates of record stores or music criticism. For an older generation, there is a sudden and overwhelming pleasure in being able to listen to all the music from your life instantly, retracing the decades through a digital library.
The cognitive dissonance occurs when people in the Intentional group—people like me—try to tell people in the Passive and Auxiliary groups how to listen to music. I know the global financial devaluation of music is irreversible, and there are only a small percentage of total music listeners for whom the phrases “buy from brick-and-mortar stores” or “support Bandcamp Fridays” means anything.
But what I fear is that the streaming era is actually writing the same listening histories for those who can’t be bothered with Intentional listening–all exclusively based on proprietary algorithms that seem like a way to discover music but, in fact, act more like a feedback loop.
A close friend, an Auxiliary listener, recently sent me a Spotify link to an album by classic rock revivalists Greta Van Fleet, noting that it would be good music for the gym. This sent me into a bit of a panic spiral for three reasons.
One is that I wondered why I neglected to share my professional life with him: In 2018, my pan of their debut album drew the attention of those beyond Pitchfork’s usual purview, with Barstool Sports suggesting that the band must have “fucked my girlfriend,” and GVF fans threatening to “TP” my house via homemade signs they held up at concerts.
The second is that I realized I am but a tiny little dust mite in the universe, and my own opinion on Greta Van Fleet is largely irrelevant beyond the scope of a few thousand music snobs and select GVF fans, and what’s actually important in the world is the bond close friends have despite these relationship glitches. Third is that Spotify knows me better than my close friend.
The more time I spend on Spotify, the more it pushes me away from the outer edges of the platform and toward the mushy middle. This is where everyone is serviced the same songs simply because that is what’s popular. Four years ago, while the app’s algorithmic autoplay feature was on, I was served the Pavement song “Harness Your Hopes,” a wordy and melodic—and by all accounts obscure—B-side from the beloved indie band.
As of this writing, the song has over 72 million streams, more than twice as much as their actual college rock hit from the ’90s, “Cut Your Hair,” the one Pavement song your average Gen X’er might actually recognize.
How did this happen? In 2020, Stereogum investigated the mystery but came up empty-handed from a technological perspective, though the answer seems obvious to me: Whereas many Pavement songs are oblique, rangy, and noisy, “Harness Your Hopes” is among the most pleasant and inoffensive songs in the band’s catalog.
It is now, in the altered reality of Spotify, the quintessential Pavement song. When frontman Stephen Malkmus was asked about this anomaly, he sounded blithely defeated: “At this point we take what we can get, even in a debased form. Because what’s left?”
The whole “Harness Your Hopes” situation is in part a result of what’s called “cumulative advantage.” It’s the idea that if something—a song, a person, an idea—happens to be slightly more popular than something else at just the right point, it will tend to become more popular still. (On the other hand, something that does not catch on will usually recede in popularity, regardless of quality.)
This is the metric of how most social recommendation algorithms work—on Facebook, the more “likes” an article has, the better odds a user will read it. But when this is applied to what songs are sent to which people, Spotify can engineer its own market of popularity as well as what song defines a band.
Popular songs on Spotify are popular within the app because they are what most people are listening to. So from both a behavioral psychology and business perspective, it makes sense for Spotify to assume that you want to listen to what other people are listening to.
The chances of the average listener staying on the app longer are much higher if Spotify curates songs that have had a similar effect on people whose taste matches theirs.
This is one of the main addictive chemicals of most streaming services: Recommend a handful songs—out of millions!—that feel uniquely personal but in fact are just what everyone else is hearing, too. If a Passive or Auxiliary listener lets the algorithmic Spotify Radio play songs based on Tom Petty’s “Breakdown,” the results are almost purely based on chronology, tempo, and feel.
Gone are the filigrees and the autobiography of the song and how it existed in the world to you, the listener. Instead, everyone’s experience is now the same.
For instance, Spotify’s radio station for Ludacris’ “What’s Your Fantasy” doesn’t link to any OutKast songs, even though I watched Ludacris open for André 3000 and Big Boi when that song was released in 2000, and both acts are from Atlanta.
Is Spotify aware that Big Boi is a huge Kate Bush fan? Does Spotify know that singer-songwriter John Darnielle of the Mountain Goats is a metal head? If you have seen Darnielle cover metal bands from Dio to Gorguts to Nightwish, or are familiar with one of his most popular songs, “The Best Ever Death Metal Band Out of Denton,” you know that he loves some sick riffs and moonward barks.
But all of that intimate (and publicly available) knowledge is lost to machine learning. Tuning into Spotify’s Mountain Goats’ Radio won’t turn up any Dio at all—just literate and mostly acoustic indie rock songs that sound similar to the Mountain Goats. Left to a streaming service, these kinds of textured and unique connections are smoothed over or erased entirely.
I have committed my personal and professional life to making sense of music, of finding connections and context within songs to create a critical framework that allows me to organize everything I listen into an ornately chaotic web.
If I started a Fugazi radio playlist, maybe I would throw some Red Hot Chili Peppers on there—you’ll hear it. If I started a Pavement radio playlist, how could I not include the Louisiana rapper Young Bleed’s song “How Ya Do Dat,” where he calls himself “slanted and enchanted”? I would argue that Prince’s “When Doves Cry” and Parquet Courts’ “Instant Disassembly” both utilize a stilted, inverted grammatical style in their lyrics and are absolutely in conversation with each other.
When music is so abundant and our attention is scarce, there’s power in adding more intention to your listening diet, more chaos, more risk. The thrill in finding music that is wired to your singular life is not that thousands of other people have found the same thing.
It’s that the music becomes something confounding and unique, a true reflection of where you are and where you’ve been. The beauty of the algorithm of your mind is that it makes perfect sense to no one but yourself.
There’s no shortage of reasons to be frustrated with the experience of listening to music on streaming services. Even if you’re unconcerned with the exploitation of artists that support the platforms, for some the act of streaming can lead to feelings of disconnection and ennui. Downloads may be on life support industry-wide, but there’s never been a better time to revisit the idea of a digital music collection—a hoarded cache of files that you own and control.
It can help narrow the nozzle of the massive firehose of music that streaming services blast in your face, freeing you from the paralysis of seemingly infinite choice—when you know exactly what’s in your collection, making a decision about what to listen to becomes much easier. And with the price of vinyl continuing to soar, a digital collection can help satisfy your collecting itch while saving money and space.
With great power, of course, comes great responsibility. Running your own collection is not without its burdens. Without the support of corporate server farms allowing companies like Spotify to seamlessly provide access to millions of songs, you will now be the one responsible for keeping redundant copies of your files, replacing hardware when it fails, and the electric bill to keep it all running.
Maybe you’re still a little sore from the trauma of having once lost your digital collection to some unfortunate event, but it’s never been easier to start over. Storage space is dirt cheap, and bandwidth has reached the point where it’s relatively easy to replicate the convenience of on-demand streaming without ever having to surrender your cash—and data—to some Swedish tech baron.
Below we’ve collected some links to gear that will help you build and maintain a digital music collection for years to come. Whether your setup consists of a mere laptop and headphones or a whole-home wireless audio system and personal streaming service, keeping a digital collection is likely to offer a significantly more rewarding—and only slightly more time-consuming—listener experience.
The file server—aka the computer running the software that manages your files—is at the heart of any digital music collection. No matter what hardware you’re playing back from, it will need to be running in order for you to listen to your music.
This makes laptops, with their batteries and limited heat dissipation, less than ideal. If it’s your only option, it will work—but Network Attached Storage boxes (compact servers that connect to your home network) and desktop computers are preferable, since they can use the cheap hard disk drives (HDD) capable of holding thousands of files, and don’t have easily degradable batteries.
If you’re already in the market for a new computer and want to buy something well-suited to double as a music server, look for a desktop machine that prioritizes expandability. Dell’s pre-built XP8950 starts at an affordable $750 and has four storage slots for adding extra hard drives.
For Mac users, the Mac Pro has tons of room for internal storage, and the newly announced Mac Studio comes with a bevy of Thunderbolt ports for connecting external drives. That said, both of those options have way more muscle than you’ll need for a music server; a late model Mac Mini will perform admirably, and comes with a pair of Thunderbolt ports to add external drives as necessary.
If you don’t want to buy a new computer, and don’t have open slots for adding new internal hard drives, you can add external drives like the Western Digital Elements.
All products featured on Pitchfork are independently selected by our editors. However, when you buy something through our retail links, we may earn an affiliate commission.
If you can swing it, a Network Attached Storage (NAS) box is the ideal hardware for running your music server. Always on and power efficient, the box is a small, purpose-specific computer that hosts your files and makes them accessible to devices on your local network—or even outside your home. Because it’s essentially a stripped-down computer, it can stream music to any device on your network without any other computer being on.
I like Synology NAS boxes because the software is user-friendly and familiar. Some models will also let you expand the number of drives it can use, and they’ve got a reputation for being durable—my 10-year-old DS713+ is still going strong. The Synology DS720+ holds two drives but can expand to use seven when paired with the DX517, a modular option great for future-proofing. The entry-level DS220j has a less powerful chip and is limited to two drives, but is more than powerful enough to run a music server.
Every home is different, but for the most reliable performance, you’ll need to connect your server to your router via ethernet, so your server and router should be close enough to run a cable between the two. I keep the top shelf on my bookshelf for network gear—it’s out of the way but still visible, and helps keep the nest of cables under control.
Whichever device you choose to run your server, it will need a drive for storing your files—and regardless of which you choose, you’ll want several. Your average four-minute MP3 ripped from a CD at high quality will typically take up less than 10 megabytes of space—that’s roughly 100 songs per gigabyte, or 100,000 per terabyte. Lossless formats like FLAC and uncompressed ones like WAV will take up considerably more hard drive space.
If you’re looking for large amounts of storage for the least amount of cash, the standard hard disk drive (HDD) still provides the best bang for your buck. Drives like Western Digital’s Red Plus or Seagate’s Ironwolf are durable, and designed to be run 24/7—ideal for a music server.
The flash memory chips that comprise solid state drives (SSDs) are generally faster and more durable than an HDD; when directly connected to a computer, they can be worth the extra money. SSD models from Samsung (870 EVO) and Crucial (MX500) are well-regarded and easy to find.
Installing hard drives in a desktop computer or NAS is usually easier than you might think—most will have trays that allow you to easily slide drives in and out without tools. NAS in particular are designed for easy installation; Synology’s models allow hard drives to pop out with the push of a button.
Compact desktops and all-in-ones, like Apple’s iMac, will be more complicated to modify, but sites like iFixit.com offer free, easy-to-follow installation guides that make it less intimidating. The hardware you choose for your server is important, but after you set it up, you’ll spend most of your time interfacing with the library software that manages your files and controls playback.
From its launch in 2001, Apple’s iTunes was the default music library software for Mac users—until 2019, when the company split the software into separate apps for Music, TV, Books, and Podcasts. Fortunately, the old-school iTunes is still available on older Macs and Windows computers. Using iTunes or Apple’s native Music app represents the best of both worlds when it comes to the convenience of streaming and the control of a personal library.
Your personal library is stored locally, and for an annual fee of $25, Apple’s iTunes Match service will scan your library, match your local files with files already on Apple Music, and upload everything else—making your entire library streamable from any Apple device you’re logged into. It essentially allows you to use Apple’s streaming infrastructure without relying on their library.
If you’re already invested in the Apple ecosystem, this is the fastest route to a personal server with the least amount of friction—iTunes will play back music to any AirPlay device on your local network, right out of the box. All your devices will talk to each other seamlessly, and if you ever stop paying the yearly fee, you still own all your music.
If you want to run a home server completely divorced from any external service, the Plex Media Server is a great place to start. The base software is free, and they have versions compatible with almost anything that’s capable of acting as a server or playback device.
The software comes in two parts: The Server app, which runs on the computer or NAS that hosts and streams your files to other devices, and the Player app, which runs on playback devices like mobile phones, set top boxes, and other computers. Plex’s metadata management is largely automated, using existing databases to fill out artist, genre, and album info, but you can still edit these tags manually.
The server is free to use and playback is free via any web browser, but you’ll benefit from some paid features, like the $5 Android and iOS apps and the $5-a-month Plex Pass subscription, which offers access to the music-centric Plexamp app as well as the Dash app for monitoring your server’s status on your network.
You can run the server on any computer and many NAS (including our recommended models), and its remote access feature allows you to access your library from outside your home—your own personal streaming service.
Another library software option popular with aesthetes and audiophiles is Roon, which is designed to live at the heart of a whole-home audio setup. At $13 per month, the subscription-based software (which is also available for $120/year or $700 lifetime) manages your library with an elegant interface, and integrates an unparalleled database of credits and metadata.
On Roon, performers, composers, producers, and engineers are all hyperlinked to a library of biographical information, connecting them with their musical influences, followers, collaborators, and other related artists and composers. You can fall down the rabbit hole and discover new things about your favorite music without ever leaving the app.
It can also handle even the most hi-resolution of audio files, like FLAC or WAV, and give you detailed information about the playback chain, so you can see what each device does with the audio. It’s designed to work with a suite of high-end audio components, taking the guesswork out of custom installs.
But there’s no remote access—files can only be played on your local network. Roon is also pricey, and some may bristle at the idea of paying a subscription to play their own files (a friend recently compared it to renting a record player), but the audiophiles who can afford it tend to love it.
Once you have a proper server, you’ll want to access its files from all your devices. While wireless speakers are often the cleanest solution (read our guide to the best wireless speakers), there are tons of other modular options to help you stream your files. And as long as you’ve got an open input on your stereo, TV, or A/V receiver, you can turn even the most vintage system into a networked speaker.
Many people already have an Apple TV, Google Chromecast, Amazon Fire, or Roku device in their home. Each of them can be used as an audio streamer with Plex—just download the app to the device, sign in, and your server will pop up.
Video game consoles have also evolved into local media hubs; whether you have a newer Xbox or Playstation, you can stream music from your Plex server. (And if you use a Windows computer, the Xbox version of Windows Media Player will be able to catalog and playback any files in your music folder on your Xbox.)
If you’re already invested in Apple or Google’s ecosystems, one way to expand your home’s ability to play music back is with modular devices that have been discontinued but still work great. Apple’s AirPort Express was launched as a mobile router, but it shines as an AirPlay device.
Google’s Chromecast Audio offers a popular and affordable way to build a whole-home audio system integrated with Google’s Chrome and Android devices. Both of these devices are still functional, and can add wireless connectivity to any stereo with an open audio input.
Even if you have the most hi-res files available, they won’t sound their best without the proper equipment for playback. At the heart of any digital system will be a digital-to-analog converter (DAC), which converts the digital ones and zeros into analog sound waves that are amplified through a speaker.
The best DAC tends to be the one you have access to. All A/V receivers have built-in DACs, though some are better than others. Any wireless or smart speaker will also have a built-in DAC, but you’ll achieve higher fidelity by using speakers that will link to form stereo pairs. If fidelity is important to you, it’s worth buying a dedicated DAC; plus, individual components like dedicated DACs, amps, and preamps allow you to update or upgrade components in a modular fashion, giving you more freedom—and potentially savings.
Some well-regarded entry level DACs we like include Cambridge Audio’s DacMagic 100 and the Audioengine D1. They sit between your music source and your amp or powered speakers (read our guide to the best bookshelf speakers).
While you can easily have a wonderful digital setup without ever connecting to the internet, a robust network is a necessity for replicating the access and convenience of most streaming services. For many, their home network starts and ends with the hardware provided to them by their internet service provider, which can be quite sufficient.
In order to make the most out of your new digital music setup, you’ll want to avoid Wi-Fi connections whenever possible, as wireless interference can plague even the most robust networks if you live in a densely populated area. Using ethernet cables instead will give you a steadier connection for the wired device and free up wireless bandwidth for the devices that must connect wirelessly.
If you don’t want to lease, buy, or borrow equipment from your ISP, you can save money and get more control over your network by using your own equipment. The TP-Link AX6000 has all the next-gen features you could want, but most people will be fine with the budget TP-Link Archer A8.
Once the server is powered on and connected to your network, install your software of choice, import your library, and you’re up and running. Connecting to your speakers depends on what gear you have: external DACs will use USB or digital audio connections, networked speakers will connect to your router via wi-fi or ethernet, and most everything else will connect with a simple aux cable.
If the prospect of buying and learning how to use all this gear and software seems daunting, try to remember that you can make your money go longer by supplementing with gear you already have. Got an old laptop lying around with a dead hard drive?
A quick drive and battery swap can revive it, and boom, you’ve got a dedicated server. Old receiver and speakers collecting dust in the garage? Plug in an aux cable from your computer or an Airport Express and it’s now a wireless audio device.
A home server setup can be extremely complex, but it can also just be a computer, a hard drive, and a stereo. And once you get things going, it’s mostly self-sustaining. Setting up your own streaming service can be rewarding—even liberating—as it adds more permanence and intention to your personal listening habits.
It was only a few weeks ago that I found out cabin fever — the restlessness, irritability, and loneliness that a person feels when confined to one place for too long — was a genuine, medical term and not just a casual way of joking about isolation.
I was on a hypochondriac mission, tasked with discovering exactly why I felt so completely out of my mind after only one week in COVID-positive solitude. When I searched my anxieties and fears, dozens of incredibly validating affirmations popped up: You are not alone; your symptoms are real; you can get better. I had never taken being alone that seriously. It was a common, unavoidable condition of being alive, so why would I?
My discovery that cabin fever was a recognized ailment encouraged me to see isolation in a new way. The severity of the condition was now obvious. As a kid, one day inside had been enough to send me climbing the walls, searching for anything to do.
What I didn’t realize as I grew older was that isolation crept into my brain in a much quieter way. Loneliness, shame, unhappiness, and impatience replaced the agitation and boredom I had grown up with. The more I read, the more I realize how universal, yet unique, this feeling is. Why does being alone make us feel this way?
Technology doesn’t help. Most of us can have all our wants and needs met from the comfort of our rooms — food delivered, friends found in anonymous chatrooms, entertainment discovered on endless streaming services. Technology, ironically, has brought freedoms to confinement.
We could spend our entire lives within one small space if we chose to, as the economy molds to serve our desires. The lazy day watching Netflix, the guilt-laden Uber Eats order, even the bold Instagram message, have all emerged around a generation spending more time by itself than any before.
Of course, isolation is not just found through a physical landscape. The most harrowing form of loneliness can occur in a crowded room. Edward Hopper famously explored the loneliness of living in the big city through paintings like “Nighthawks.”
This ubiquitous depiction of urban isolation, a diner with no entrance and no exit, serves as a memorable illustration of loneliness. When you are inside of this feeling — the metaphorical diner if you will — there is no perceived beginning or end, and no consideration from those around you, as nothing exists beyond this world-swallowing experience.
During the pandemic, isolation transformed from a misfortunate occurrence to something so widespread it was impossible to avoid. Like most people, I spent weeks and weeks inside my house, with no contact with anyone except the members of my household. All aspects of isolation hit at once and were impossible to escape. I realized how easy it would be to continue living like this — perpetually isolated.
I wasn’t the only one who had this idea. The switch to working from home brought the overlapping isolations of technology and the pandemic together. However, this change was not an unavoidable curse cast upon working society: Only three percent want to fully return to the office now that we are able to. Solitude is not just wrought upon us; oftentimes, we choose it. The desire to be left alone by the bothers of the social world often overpowers the negative experience that isolation implies.
I am drawn to the idea that reading can connect the isolated — that one story on loneliness can link together hundreds of confined minds to think, Maybe I’m not alone. The stories on this list do not just seek to analyze and dissect the effects of isolation; they serve as a powerful tool of connection.
Ann Babe has written a number of pieces on the solitary experience of different Korean groups, including a powerful article on the isolation of Korean adoptees in America which looks into solitude as an inherent feature of minority identity.
Like many other people, the coronavirus lockdown was my first taste of prolonged isolation. It was a complete change from my regular lifestyle. But what was it like for those who were already isolated — people who had spent years of their lives locked in their rooms, having already chosen a lifestyle of reclusiveness? This describes the hikikomori, a unique subset of people, largely in Asia, who can live decades in almost complete isolation.
South Korean-based journalist Anne Babe thoughtfully explores the experience of these people during the pandemic. She sensitively lays out multiple, personal hikikomori narratives, displaying their anxieties, reservations, and fears, all without judgment.
The effects of COVID on these people ran just as deep, despite the misguided thought that they should be used to it. Babe takes us into their worlds, reminding us that there’s not so much difference between us and them.
Reflecting on the pandemic, Kim makes a comparison. “Someone who’s been living in the cold climate for a long period of time, like I have, is able to continue on in the cold weather,” he says. “But if that person is from a hot place, they will find it hard to adapt to the suddenly freezing climate.
I would say I’m numb to the coronavirus situation because I am so used to being secluded in my room. But I wouldn’t say I’m completely indifferent to it, because I’ve experienced, briefly, the warmth of being part of society.”
Olivia Laing is also the author of The Lonely City, an enlightening book that pulls together personal narrative and art analysis to develop a beautiful understanding of loneliness.
As a Gen Zer, technology is an integral part of my life. It’s how I keep up with work, understand the daily happenings of the world, and, most importantly, how I talk to every single person I know. This reliance on social media for connection has potentially worrying effects, as Olivia Laing argues in her illustration of concerns for strictly virtual bonds.
Written in 2015, Laing’s fascinating piece points out what we should have realized by then — that the internet is not the perfect tool for connection, that is just an illusion. We may believe it allows us to be seen while simultaneously supporting a level of privacy, but neither can truly be achieved.
You will never be viewed for who you really are, just as you will never be concealed from prying eyes. Years later, her predicted anxieties have turned into daily reality. It is normal for every app to gather mountains of data on you, every mistake to result in a permanent “canceling,” and every relationship to spend at least half its time connecting through social media.
Laing discovers the true nature of the online world and maintains tension to the last word as we discover more and more truths about our online activity.
This growing entanglement of the corporate and social, this creeping sense of being tracked by invisible eyes, demands an increasing sophistication about what is said and where. The possibility of virulent judgment and rejection induces precisely the kind of hypervigilance and withdrawal that increases loneliness. With this has come the slowly dawning realisation that our digital traces will long outlive us.
I spent my lockdown days in Scotland, under the daily COVID guidance of Boris Johnson, who created laws that only permitted going outside once a day, for exercise. For years, like most other countries around the world, we could not meet anyone outside our “bubble” — the small group of people designated as our close contacts.
These restrictions on freedom led to societal concerns about the power of government to forbid even the most basic forms of contact, such as a hug, and led many to come back to the fundamental question: Is socialization a human right?
Gawande delves into this concern in this piece, which focuses on the emergence of solitary confinement as a regular form of punishment within the American incarceration system. He draws us in with stories of monkeys and prisoners of war, creating a compelling argument for the inhumanity of isolation from the get-go.
He keeps this level of focus throughout, putting you through the experience of solitary confinement with his illustrative depictions. By the end, you’ll be writing to your local representative, asking them to reconsider their position on this brutal prison punishment.
This presents us with an awkward question: If prolonged isolation is—as research and experience have confirmed for decades—so objectively horrifying, so intrinsically cruel, how did we end up with a prison system that may subject more of our own citizens to it than any other country in history has?
There is an implied difference between solitude and isolation. Solitude is a choice, your own rejection of the world, your own contentment with being alone. With isolation, the rejection flips; you are pushed out of society, no matter how much you want to climb back in.
This peculiarity is just one that Sarah Fay explores in this piece. Subtle contradictions are her strong suit, as she walks the line between being alone and being lonely, the various subtleties between autophobia and eremophobia, and the distinction between interaction and connection. Ultimately, Fay’s personality is the driving force of this article, compelling us to read on to uncover her personal revelations on solitude.
The key to connection was not to be needy of connection with others. We have to give freely of ourselves, act as social philanthropists who donate anonymously expecting no plaques or appreciation in return. Turkle and others have pointed to this as the reason why social media doesn’t make us feel connected. Each tweet, post, or friend request is made with the expectation of a response: a retweet, a repost, a like, an accepted request.
Isolation can often be interlinked with identity. People who are perpetually alone may come to the conclusion that this feeling is an inherent feature of who they are. This is particularly true with minorities, as each member finds themselves intrinsically different from the people surrounding them.
Michael Hobbes reflects on this experience within the gay community, almost a year after the Supreme Court legalized same-sex marriage in all 50 states. Hobbes meets each man he interviews with a deep understanding — he is a gay man himself — as he intertwines his personal narrative with that of his community. He allows their revelations to propel the article, using his own logic to back each reflection.
I’m always drawn to pieces that effectively communicate an experience I will never personally understand. Hobbes’ depiction is painful; it is raw; but, importantly, it is thoughtful. Each sentence takes care not just for its audience, but for the subjects it depicts. The level of consideration put into each word creates a simultaneously welcoming and challenging reading experience.
You grow up with this loneliness, accumulating all this baggage, and then you arrive in the Castro or Chelsea or Boystown thinking you’ll finally be accepted for who you are. And then you realize that everyone else here has baggage, too.
All of a sudden it’s not your gayness that gets you rejected. It’s your weight, or your income, or your race. “The bullied kids of our youth,” Paul says, “grew up and became bullies themselves.”
The Loneliness Project also takes on the normalcy of loneliness with its online archive detailing anecdotes of isolation from hundreds of submitters.
Is loneliness shameful? Does it function as a reflection of who we are as people? These are the integral questions considered by Claire Bushey as she investigates the hows and whys of her own personal loneliness, which started long before the restraints of COVID.
To Bushy, being alone is neither a curse nor a blessing: It is simply a way of being. She presents her findings as a blunt response to the ideas that surrounded isolation at the start of the pandemic — that this was a new, torturous experience for all.
What draws me to this piece is its honesty: Bushey doesn’t hide behind convention and expectation; she lays out everything she feels and experiences as if it were essential.
Lonely as a cloud? I am as lonely as an iceberg, an egg, a half carafe of wine. I am lonely as the body is hungry three times a day, hollowed again and again by an ache that does not ease except with the sustenance of connection.
The feeling differs from the peace of solitude, which many enjoy, including me at times. Instead, it is a gnawing sadness. Even before the pandemic, a combination of circumstance and choice left me with fewer close ties than I wanted. Every day I forage for connection, and some days I go hungry.
Capitalism, in one form or another, has been around for a very long time. Historians generally assign the start of modern capitalism to the 16th century, replacing the feudal system of the Middle Ages where bartering was the mainstay of trade.
I won’t bore you with the effect the Crusades had on creating demand for spices or how satisfying consumer demand led to exploration, colonization, and exploitation. It did, and I will just leave it at that.
The driving force in capitalism is profit, the “bottom line” as we call it now. To that end, people started businesses, invested their money into their businesses, and if they were smart and a little bit lucky, their business grew and was successful. I have never begrudged anyone who started a business, ran it ethically, and made a profit.
I myself had a lemonade stand when I was a small boy, and thanks to the neighborhood kids and my parents, I made a small profit. Never once did I engage in unethical or questionable business practices. I didn’t water the lemonade down and I used plenty of sugar.
My cups were clean. I will admit I didn’t pay my taxes on that income, but since I didn’t know anything about taxes in 1962 and since the IRS only goes back three years, I think I am safe now.
The quest for profit isn’t always this wholesome and innocent. Sometimes this quest produces unusual or weird methods to secure a profit. At other times it produces methods that are at best unethical and at worst, just plain criminal.
Gordon Gekko, the antagonist in the 1986 movie “Wall Street,” proclaimed at a shareholders' meeting that “greed is good.” Years later, I still hear people repeat this stale lie, and a lie it is. Greed is not good. A healthy desire is. A balanced yearning is. Greed, however, is not.
What follows is what I consider to be the deformed offspring of an economic system that began with good intentions and has devolved into a nightmare.
If you have ever been in a restroom featuring pay toilets, you can see just how far the drive for profit can go. Seriously, I would love to meet the individual who thought of actually charging people to execute a bodily function. It has been a while since I have been in a restroom featuring these, but I can still remember clearly what it looked like.
In this bathroom, there were four stalls, and in order to enter the stall, a dime had to be inserted into a small mechanism much like those candy machines. Once the coin is inserted, a small handle is turned so the coin is deposited in the collection box and the door opens to unveil a private stall to unleash, well, whatever needs to be unleashed.
What about the people who don’t have a dime? What are they to do? No fear. The budding young capitalist that invented the pay toilet has the answer. Next to the stalls, hanging off the wall and in plain sight for all to see, was the free toilet. The choice facing everyone who entered was either to pay or perform for an audience. I never saw anyone using the free toilet.
Another strange product of capitalism is the way gasoline is priced. No other liquid product on the market is priced the way gasoline is. If I buy a gallon of organic, grass-fed, whole milk, it will cost me $6.99. If I buy a 12-ounce can of Pepsi, it will cost me $2.30.
Gasoline, on the other hand, has an extra “9” in the price. A gallon of gas isn’t $5.19. Instead, it is $5.199, with an extra 9/10 of a cent added at the end. We don’t even have coins that small. How would someone pay for exactly one gallon of gas? It’s not even possible.
Another strange phenomenon in our capitalist economy is charging people “application fees” when they want to rent an apartment. The logic behind it, I am told, is for the management to conduct a background check to determine if the person is financially stable and morally sound enough to rent to.
On the surface, it seems to make sense. After all, no one wants to rent to someone who has a history of being unable to pay their rent or has a history of criminal activity.
If this is such a smart and justifiable action, why aren’t there application fees for jobs? Most employers do background checks and drug tests, and yet there is no cost to the applicant; nor are there application fees for credit cards, and banks always run an applicant’s credit history prior to approving a credit card application.
There is something incredibly odd about paying to apply for something that you will be paying for once you are approved. What’s next? An exit fee?
Speaking of paying for nothing, if you have ever been to a club that requires you to pay a “cover charge,” you are literally paying for the privilege of walking into the place. Clubs that have live music can be excused because their cover charge is more of a fee to hear the band.
In that case, you are getting something for your money, not unlike buying a concert ticket. But that isn’t always the case. Many times you are simply paying in order to enter the place.
Most people with checking accounts, at one time or another, have been hit with an “overdraft fee” for swiping their card when they didn’t have enough money in their account to cover it. The overworked and worn-out single mom, swinging by McDonald's to buy her screaming child a Happy Meal, later finds out that $5 Happy Meal cost her $40 because they tack on the “overdraft fee” because she is broke.
To the rational mind, what is really going on in this scenario is the bank is giving her a short-term loan until she puts more money in her account, which could be the next day or even the same day. For this “convenience,” they will charge upwards of $35 or more, depending on the bank.
Imagine for a moment that you asked me to loan you $5 until tomorrow. I agree to do it, but I tell you tomorrow you will have to pay me $40 for doing it. When you ask why $40, I tell you $5 is the repayment of the loan, and the remaining $35 is my “fee.” If you laughed at the outrageousness of my proposal, you would be well within your rights.
Banks do this every single day to the poor. While there are no maximum interest rates set by the federal government (of course), individual states have their own usury laws that set the maximum interest rate allowed. None of the states have usury laws that would allow a bank to charge $35 interest on a $5 loan for one day. How do banks get away with this?
They call it a fee instead. Banks are so arrogant about this that years ago William Cooper, the now-deceased CEO of TCF Bank, named his personal yacht “The Overdraft.”
Closely related to the overdraft fee is the default interest rate. The default interest rate is the rate credit card companies charge people when they are unable to make their monthly payments. Default interest rates can be as high as 35% or more, which makes an impossible situation even more impossible. The logic goes something like this.
If you are unable to make your payment because you have no money, we are going to charge you even more money that you don’t have. As Robert Reich put it, “poverty charges interest.” This kind of thinking is so far down the rabbit hole it will never find its way out.
In 1989, the method for determining a person’s eligibility for obtaining loans was started. This was the year the “credit score” was introduced. It was supposed to be an unbiased way of determining credit worthiness. Prior to this, lenders used different methods to determine whether or not a person was a good risk for a loan, including such discriminatory methods as zip codes.
On the surface, this credit score seems like a fair way to assess creditworthiness. It is based on five criteria: (1) payment history, (2) amount of debt owed, (3)credit history length, (4) credit mix, and (5) number of times a person has applied for new credit.
From this information, a person is given a number from 300 to 850 as their credit score. The higher the number, the more creditworthy they are. Anything over 700 is generally considered a good credit score.
Problems arise when credit scores are used to determine things other than creditworthiness. For example, some employers want to know an applicant’s credit score as a way to judge a person’s moral makeup.
The idea is if a person’s credit history is not good, it is a moral failing and this person might not be a good hire. If they have had credit problems, there are probably other things in their background that make them undesirable as well. Judgments are made about people based on their credit scores.
A job loss or an ugly divorce can decimate a person’s credit score. An otherwise good person who has maintained a high credit score their entire life can find themselves on the receiving end of the derision aimed at people who have low credit scores if they experience such an event.
No one cares what your credit score used to be or how long you had it. They only look at now. If you have a credit score in the 600s, you will be deemed a loser regardless of your past history. You are a moral failure, a bad person.
Perhaps the most morally repugnant aspect of capitalism stems from supply and demand. Under this capitalistic rule, when an item is in short supply, the price of that item goes up. To that end, we literally see food being destroyed in order to prop up the price.
Most people can remember farmers dumping their milk to lower the supply so the price goes up, but less well-known is how much food is destroyed every day by supermarkets for the same reason.
Each day throughout the country, supermarkets are destroying perfectly good food because the arbitrarily made “expiration date” is drawing near. Very little of the food is donated or sold for less. In my article from 2021 “Confessions of a Grocery Store Worker,”
I described in detail the food I threw out, and the reasons I was told I had to do it. In a nation where people struggle to find enough food, this act is criminal.
Many equate capitalism with freedom or even religion. Despite the fact capitalism is never mentioned in the Constitution, many would claim capitalism is the required type of economy in the United States. Despite the fact capitalism is never mentioned in the Bible, many would say capitalism is God’s law.
The truth is capitalism has evolved into another tool of enslavement, a way for the rich and powerful to retain control over everyone else. We have come a long way from my little lemonade stand, and capitalism continues to evolve. I shudder to think what is coming next.
The girl was no more than 12. Night had fallen, and the caravan of gospel singers that she’d traveled with from Nashville had steered their sedans and station wagons to a quiet space under an oak tree in Mississippi.
Booking a hotel room wasn’t an option, not for this group of Black performers in the early ’50s. Instead, they shifted and turned in their seats, in search of a comfortable position and a few hours of sleep.
Their peace was interrupted by the rumble of approaching engines. Candi Staton heard doors clunk open, and several pairs of footsteps approach. Flashlight beams invaded the cars, stirring awake the other occupants. A voice cut through the air. “What are you n—s doing here?” asked a white police officer.
“We’re singers,” said one member of the caravan. “We travel. We just stopped to take a nap.” Staton had experienced the terror of the Ku Klux Klan years earlier, back home in Alabama, where her mother used to tuck her under a bed when Klan members rumbled by in pickup trucks, armed with smoldering torches.
Now Staton — who would befriend and tour with Sam Cooke, Aretha Franklin, and The Staple Singers — was in Mississippi, where 581 lynchings were reported between 1882 and 1968. “In those days,” she’d recall years later, “you didn’t know what to expect. That song — ‘strange fruit, hanging from the poplar trees’ — came to mind whenever a police officer stopped you. Especially more than one.”
The officer turned his attention to five men, who sat terrified in another car, and ordered them to get out. He told them to sing and dance. One meekly protested that they only sang. “You gon’ dance tonight, n—,” Staton would remember the officer responding.
“You gon’ dance tonight.” He aimed a gun at the men’s feet, and opened fire. “The police fell out laughing. They kept shooting at the ground,” Staton says. “I cried. I honestly cried for the men.”
The encounter, a microcosm of the bigotry and violence that Black Americans routinely faced, could have compelled Staton and her older sister, Maggie, to quit their group — The Jewell Gospel Trio — and return home. But Staton pressed on. As a small child, she’d discovered that when she sang, her sound was unlike anything the adults in her life had ever heard.
Her voice could crackle with campfire warmth, or summon freight train strength; she instinctively understood how to make a listener actually feel the joy or sorrow that a sheet of lyrics hinted at. Staton wanted only a chance to share that gift. What she often found though, were obstacles — people and circumstances that threatened to silence her voice.
There was a missed opportunity — an invitation, at 18, to move to California with her friends Cooke and Lou Rawls and pursue a recording contract. A jealous husband who beat her and wanted her nowhere near any stage, leaving her a single mother of four at age 24.
To support her children, Staton worked at a nursing home, while some of the musicians she’d traveled with as an adolescent found stardom. It was a practical, understandable choice. But a thought nagged at her: What if she could somehow find her way back to performing?
Toward the end of the ’60s — without the benefit of a modern DIY star-making vehicle like TikTok — Staton built a new musical career from scratch. She played smoke-filled nightclubs, toured the unpredictable Chitlin’ Circuit, and recorded some of the most arresting soul music to come out of FAME Studios in Muscle Shoals, Alabama, visceral songs about heartache, and the torture of doomed relationships: “Too Hurt to Cry,” “I’m Just a Prisoner (Of Your Good Lovin’),” “I’d Rather Be An Old Man’s Sweetheart”
Staton reinvented herself in the mid-’70s, becoming a disco star and an early ally of LGBTQ+ communities — and then reinvented herself again in the ’80s, this time as a Grammy-nominated gospel artist who doubled as the host of shows on Christian television.
Another rebirth, in the ’90s, saw her become a house music sensation in the U.K.; in the aughts, she returned to Southern soul, just as a younger generation of musicians, like Florence + the Machine and Jason Isbell, were drawing new attention to Staton’s past work.
Her story is almost too big to fathom, a life that weaved through multiple chapters of American musical history, and weathered dizzying amounts of public success and private anguish. Staton’s admirers believe she possessed one of the defining voices of her generation, yet has sometimes been overlooked in conversations about soul music greats of the last 50 years.
Her talent and tenacity, they argue, deserve wider appreciation. At 82, Staton has outlived many of the musicians she called friends. “She’s a legend to us,” says John Paul White, the singer, songwriter, and former member of the Civil Wars, who was born in Muscle Shoals.
“But I quickly realized that outside our circle, she’s less known. And I always felt like that was grossly unfair — the talent of Candi Staton, in relation to the celebrity of Candi Staton.”
It was on a 40-acre farm in rural Alabama that Canzetta Maria Staton first learned that music could represent hope, a channel of light in life’s darkest valleys. Her family lived in Hanceville, surrounded by dirt roads; just 12 miles to the south sat Colony, a town originally settled by previously enslaved people following the Civil War.
“We were dirt, dirt poor,” Staton says. “Our family was so poor, we didn’t even have shoes to wear for school, until my mother got enough money. We had some of the ugliest shoes you ever wanted to see. They cost but $1.98. They were boy shoes, not girl shoes.”
Throughout Staton’s childhood in the ’40s, Jim Crow laws reigned. Schools were still segregated — the U.S. Supreme Court wouldn’t rule that practice unconstitutional until 1954 — and it was impossible to avoid the menace baked into everyday life. Staton remembers reading a sign affixed to a nearby bridge: “Run n— run.
If you can’t read, run anyway.” When Klan members stalked past their farm in search of a target, Staton’s mother dropped to her knees, and prayed, “Oh Lord, please don’t let them come to our house.” Those past aggressions no longer seem so far away.
Republican lawmakers have advanced hundreds of bills across the U.S. to restrict voting access, while activists have launched coordinated campaigns to ban books about, or by, people of color and LGBTQ individuals. “I’ve lived all these years. [Black women] fought hard to even get the right to vote,” Staton says. “Now they’re trying to pull that backwards. Gradually. Day by day, incident by incident.”
As a child, Staton and her five siblings fixated on a new family possession to help them process the cruelty of the world: a radio. The children stretched out on the floor, and listened as a melange of booming voices — Mahalia Jackson, B.B. King, The Five Blind Boys of Alabama — unspooled stories of love, struggle, and spiritual reassurance in song.
When Staton was 5, her mother answered a knock at their door. Members of a traveling church group asked if they could use the family farm for an impromptu performance. She agreed, and Staton was drawn to the sound the group conjured. “They set up their drums and tambourines.
It was nothing like the boring churches I was used to. They sung fast songs, and they were dancing,” Staton explains. “I thought that was the most joyful thing I’d ever seen in my entire life.” Soon after, Staton and her 7-year-old sister, Maggie, started to sing together, and learned how to harmonize. “Do you know how I got a voice? God gave me a talent,” she says, “because of my mother’s generosity to strangers.”
Staton was drawn to the sound the group conjured. “They set up their drums and tambourines. It was nothing like the boring churches I was used to. They sung fast songs, and they were dancing…”
A few years later, Staton found new possibilities in Cleveland, where her mother had relocated her children to escape her husband. “Papa was a rolling stone,” Staton says. “Drinking and gambling and chasing women.” There, Staton and her sister participated in a singing contest at a local church, and caught the ear of a towering woman, Bishop Mattie Lou Jewell, who oversaw dozens of churches, and a Tennessee-based school called the Jewell Academy.
Jewell offered to let Staton and her sister attend the academy for free — as long as they’d sing at revivals that she staged across the country. The Staton girls formed their gospel trio with Jewell’s granddaughter, Naomi Harrison. A teenaged Staton can be heard on some of the group’s surviving recordings; on a track like 1957’s “Praying Time,” she sings with the poise and power of someone twice her age.
On the road, they met kindred spirits, other young performers who possessed stunning voices and a hunger to connect with strangers through song. In between performances at churches and auditoriums, they’d play softball and muse about their futures. During one conversation, Sam Cooke confided to Staton that he’d decided to leave his group, The Soul Stirrers, and transition from gospel music to the blues.
Staton was startled; crossing over to secular music had long been considered too risky, personally and professionally, to even attempt. She’d once watched a gospel audience boo and shout “Traitor!” at one of her idols, the pioneering guitarist Sister Rosetta Tharpe, who began playing secular venues in the late 1930s.
“When we think about a person who’s performed in and who grew up in the world of sacred music, it really is a cultural phenomenon that absorbs every aspect of your life,” says Katie Rainge-Briggs, the exhibition and collections manager at the National Museum of African American Music, in Tennessee. “When that happens, intrinsically moving to the space of the world seems to have so many pitfalls.”
In 1957, Cooke released a dreamy new song that he’d written: “You Send Me.” The track shot to No. 1 on Billboard’s Hot 100 and Rhythm and Blues charts, an encouraging sign for other gospel singers, like Lou Rawls, who wanted to follow in Cooke’s footsteps.
A year later, when Staton was 18, the two men suggested that she join them in Los Angeles. “Sam and Lou said they’d get me with Capitol Records,” Staton says. “I was so excited. I told my mother, ‘They said they’d take me to California!’ But my mother said, ‘No way. You’re never singing the blues, little girl.’” But my mother said, ‘No way. You’re never singing the blues, little girl.’”
It’s easy to imagine this what-if moment having gone differently — a young Staton landing a record deal, her star rising steadily as the doo-wop wave of the ’50s gave way to the Motown sound of the early ’60s. But Staton isn’t so sure. “You know, I was 18. Full of energy and excitement,” she tells me, letting go of a small sigh. “And wide open and ignorant. I don’t have a clue what would have happened to me.”
Rawls, who would duet with Cooke on their 1962 hit, “Bring It On Home to Me,” briefly dated Staton, and assured her they would be married. Rawls’ mother intervened, and told Staton she should instead return home and finish high school. Staton reluctantly agreed. It was another pivotal choice — one that nearly cost her life.
Back in Alabama, she met a man who drove an eye-catching ’57 Chevrolet and doted on her. Soon, she became pregnant. Staton hoped to continue her singing career, but instead found herself married, the mother of four children. The stage never seemed so far away.
Staton discovered that the man she married had a dark side, one that would prove dangerous. He became verbally and physically abusive, she says, and grew jealous if he thought other men looked at her. “When I got married to him, he owned me,” she says. “I was no longer free.”
On Valentine’s Day 1964, Staton laid in bed with her 18-month-old daughter and watched TV, while a chilly rain fell outside their Birmingham home. Her husband barged in, accused her of cheating — and began attacking her. Staton says he dragged her toward his car.
She believed he intended to take her to a nearby portion of Interstate 65, which was under construction. “He planned to take me up there, jump out of the car, and let the car go off the road with me in it,” she says. A relative who lived next door heard Staton’s screams and intervened.
Staton filed for divorce, and — like her mother, years earlier — moved with her children to Cleveland, where one of her sisters lived. Staton had been a little girl during her first visit to the city, one whose singing voice pointed to a bright future. Now, her circumstances were far more bleak.
She landed a job at a nursing home, which barely paid enough to cover her bills. She had two arms, and four children; trying to meet all of their needs could sometimes feel impossible. “This is why I could sing the blues,” Staton says. “I had to face the blues everyday.”
On one rare evening, Staton had some time for herself. She ventured to a nightclub where her old friends, The Staple Singers, were appearing, along with The Temptations. Backstage, she caught up with Pervis Staples, Mavis’s brother.
Their conversation was interrupted by David Ruffin, the lanky, mercurial Temptations singer. Ruffin glanced through his dark-rimmed glasses at Staton, who wore a pink dress and no makeup. “Whoa, where’d you get that little country girl from?” he blurted. “That your girlfriend, Pervis?” Staples tried to explain that Staton had once been a singer, but Ruffin continued needling. “If that’s your girlfriend,” he laughed, “Lord have mercy!”
A fire sparked inside Staton. She had once dazzled audiences across the country with ease — and now she was being treated like a punchline. She turned to Ruffin. “I knew what I could deliver, if only I had a chance,” she says. “I looked him in the face, because I’ve never been shy. I said, ‘You’re gonna regret these words. You gonna be paying to see me one day.’”
Staton wasted little time trying to make good on her backstage vow to David Ruffin. She would quickly find success and validation — and new challenges that threatened to derail her career. Her first step was to find a stage. In Cleveland, her brother approached a band at a small club, and persuaded them to let his sister have a turn at the mic.
“I didn’t know them. They didn’t know me,” Staton says. “But everybody knows ‘Stormy Monday.’” She tore through the decades-old blues number, which traces a week’s worth of misery, a sentiment Staton understood all too well. “I can’t sing a song if I don’t know the meaning of that feeling,” she says. “I have actually lived that moment.”
“I didn’t know them. They didn’t know me,” Staton says. “But everybody knows ‘Stormy Monday.’” In 1968, she moved to Tennessee, and ran into an artist she’d played with years earlier, the blues singer and songwriter Clarence Carter.
Fate was about to bend in Staton’s favor. Carter insisted that Staton travel with him to Muscle Shoals, a city in Alabama situated about 20 miles east of the Mississippi River. There, a producer named Rick Hall had turned a small, unheard-of recording studio into a hit-making phenomenon.
Wilson Pickett recorded some of his most popular songs — “Land of 1000 Dances,” “Mustang Sally” — at Hall’s FAME Studios in 1966, with a band composed of local musicians who possessed an almost preternatural ability to find a groove. A year later, Aretha Franklin recorded what was then the biggest hit of her career, “I Never Loved a Man the Way I Love You” with Hall’s crew. The Rolling Stones, Bob Dylan, and Paul Simon were among other artists who would make a pilgrimage to Muscle Shoals, hoping to tap into the local sound.
Plenty of scenes from the 2014 horror film It Follows would give any viewer the chills. The woman splayed on the beach of a Michigan lake, chunks missing from her blood-spattered legs, one red stiletto intact. The nightgowned granny stalking a high school homeroom. For me, the scene in the backyard pool disturbed as much as any other.
No violence, no jumpscare. Not much happens. A girl in a pool, boys watching. She dismisses their attention as though reciting a line from a timeworn game. Tag, you’re it. Hardly worth goosebumps.But the familiarity of the moment, that second in which a presence is sensed, then the gaze recognized, accepted. The hint of shoulder-shrugging status quo. Boys will be boys.
I have seen more horror films than any other kind. I am the friend you call when you need your hand held through Midsommar, when a trivia question asks if it was in Phantasm II or III that the gold death spheres first appeared. But I wouldn’t say I’m a fan.
My viewing habit is more of an ongoing, uninterrogated fascination, a slow tutelage in the form. So I understand that the girl receiving the camera’s early attention in It Follows is the protagonist, and that she will survive. And I understand that the pool, shot from multiple angles, is an important setting that will reappear, with escalating stakes.
Carol J. Clover, author of Men, Women, and Chainsaws: Gender in the Modern Horror Film, would classify the pool in It Follows as the “Terrible Place.” In the horror film schema, it appears early in the storyline as a site of comfort — a “safe haven,” like that backyard pool — but later becomes the place where the victims “survey the visible evidence, of the human crimes and perversions that have transpired there,” and understand their fate.
The Terrible Place is protean. In the climactic scene of It Follows, when the safe haven reappears it does so as an indoor municipal pool the girl used to visit as a child. She has spent the story watched not by a couple of horny boys, but by a menacing, invisible force that has shaped her every choice. In the water, she must confront it.
Watching the film, I felt a deep, unsettling knowing, and it started with that scene in the backyard pool. The girl’s casual, practiced vigilance while in the water — I recognized that. It transported me to the pools of my youth. I remembered being a teenager, a girl. I felt the water’s cold slap, heard the peal of the lifeguard’s shrill whistle. Mostly, I sensed the gaze.
I came to read Clover expecting a handy visual theory I could use to analyze the film and my response to it. What I found was a way of seeing that would help me decode a script I’d been stuck in for much of my life.
In Baltimore, where I grew up, the summer mix of high temperature and humidity made for air so hellishly stultifying you could cook dinner just by leaving it on the kitchen counter. My neighborhood consisted of small identical brick row houses, each with a shoebox backyard concreted over or given to weeds.
Pools were not in our architectural vernacular. We cooled ourselves with lawn sprinklers, a hose, or at the one house with a Slip ’N Slide. Our air conditioning was a single window unit in my parents’ bedroom. On the hottest nights I would camp on the floor, dreaming of sparkling cubes of turquoise, chlorinated water.
I had a real-life pool in mind: the community one tucked away in the more affluent neighborhood adjacent to ours. It wasn’t a country club, but all the same had a membership roster and a padlocked gate, and if your home fell outside the catchment area, as ours did, you had to pay extra for access.
Friends who lived in that neighborhood spent entire summers perfecting their cannonballs and guzzling Capri-Suns, an enviable existence. Eventually, my parents applied for membership. Pictures from that summer we joined show me, 6 years old, thumb in mouth, pouting on the sodden pool deck. I had chronic ear infections, and submerging myself in water gave me terrible pain.
I did it anyway. The infections subsided over the next year, but a new discomfort awaited: To celebrate my First Holy Communion in the spring I had gotten my ears pierced, and in the chlorine the holes foamed like the jaws of a rabid dog.
I haven’t suffered an acute trauma in a pool. There is no near drowning, no crack of the head from a bungled dive, no dark blot in my history. I love swimming — in oceans where I can align myself with the current, or in lakes where I can slice through placid water.
But the pool was a place I was always uncomfortable. Sunbathing on vinyl loungers, playing Marco Polo, eating Lance peanut butter and cheese crackers from the vending machine — every moment that I associate with summers at the pool was undergirded by a persistent discomfort in my body.
The ear canals, the ear lobes, and then, as the years passed and I started middle school, a discomfort with the attention my body gathered, a discomfort that followed me like a haunting. In the blistering afternoons of a Baltimore summer, the pool brought relief. But for a teenage girl, relief comes at a cost.
One weekend in the third grade I spent the night at a friend’s house, and there saw my first horror film, Children of the Corn. As my friend’s older sister cued up the VHS tape, she didn’t bother to warn us about the impending gore, maybe because violent images were commonplace at the Catholic school we all attended, where crucifixes outnumbered glue sticks, the thorn-mutilated Son of God, in everlasting perfect attendance, judging us from the walls.
I didn’t sleep that night, or the next. It took me a week before I could get Stephen King’s story about devil-worshipping, ritual-killing children out of my head. What exactly was I scared of? The fear that kept me up wasn’t that I was like the children in the film (though Principal Eileen did treat us like we were devil-born murderers)
I was far from being a road-tripping adult like their victims. But the familiar setting tugged horror within reach. My grandparents lived in the agricultural belt of Maryland’s Eastern Shore, in a town surrounded by miles of cornfields. We would be visiting soon.
All too easily I envisioned Malachi lurking behind the rows of tender stalks. The moment replayed in my mind again and again, and the resolution was always the same: He was not a character in a film, but a person as tangible as the fallen husks and silk on which he stood.
I could smell the resinous ooze as his boots crushed a path toward me, as the screen between us dissolved, all with the ease of water turning to wine. What kept me up at night was the possibility that the film was not fiction, but real life.
Did I avoid horror films from then on? No. In the ’80s basements of our middle-class neighborhood, the only sight more common than knotty pine paneling and an open Doritos bag was a TV playing the latest release on a VCR. Halloween, Carrie, The Omen, The Texas Chain Saw Massacre, Damien, Poltergeist, Friday the 13th; all their sequels, prequels, and spinoffs.
Catholicism certainly primed me to expect fear and discomfort as life’s constants, and perhaps for this reason I watched, undeterred, the good little supplicant. And yet the cold tingle of fear pleased me. I was drawn to it, for reasons I couldn’t explain.
I could smell the resinous ooze as his boots crushed a path toward me, as the screen between us dissolved, all with the ease of water turning to wine. What kept me up at night was the possibility that the film was not fiction, but real life.
After reading Clover, and her deconstruction of the horror film protagonist known as the Final Girl, those reasons come into focus. Decades after Men, Women, and Chainsaws’ publication, “Final Girl” is practically a household term. Anyone who has watched a horror film knows her.
She is the one “who encounters the mutilated bodies of her friends and perceives the full extent of the preceding horror and of her own peril.” She is the boyish one, with names like “Stevie, Marti, Terry, Laurie, Stretch, Will, Joey, Max.” In the case of It Follows, Jay. She is “not fully feminine,” she displays “apartness from other girls.” She is the character who lives to tell the story.
Like many things in life, my experience of the concept predated my knowledge of it. In those early horror-watching years, I was an androgynous-named, androgynous-looking girl whose bowl haircut and T-shirts and Jams aesthetic practically begged that I be mistaken for a boy, which I repeatedly was. I always had, like any Final Girl, a lonely feeling of apartness.
Parking lot full of Chevy station wagons, windows cocked halfway down. On the other side of a chain-link fence, wet towels slouch on sun loungers. The air holds a mix of chlorine and Coppertone. White bodies in various stages of sunburn and tan splash in the pool, move around its perimeter. Sauntering, running. The harsh whistle of a lifeguard occasionally interrupts the shouts and chatter, but never enough for a moment of true quiet.
Three adolescent girls stand in line at the deep end’s diving board. The first two wear bikinis, tug the tops to get their cleavage just right. They are replicas of Phoebe Cates in Fast Times at Ridgemont High. When they lean forward to squeeze the sodden ends of their long hair, they back their bodies away, as if an errant drop might give them the plague.
The Final Girl wears a one-piece, plain and purposeful as an athletic swimsuit. Her chest, according to the sixth-grade developmental chart, is flat as a chalkboard, and her hair, chopped in imitation of Dorothy Hamill, is too short for the ritual of squeezing it dry. She thinks briefly of whipping her head like the boys do when they climb the ladder from the pool, then lets the water sluice down her back.
Her friends giggle, tug at their bikinis again. They are looking past the Final Girl, beyond her, to a row of boys from their grade. Five of them, a white bench of judges. Legs spread, torsos draped over knees in expectation of a show.
The boy on the far right sat across from the Final Girl in art class the previous year at school, threatened her jokingly, daily, with X-ACTO knives. Now, through the tunnel of his swim trunks, his hairless testicles bulge out of the net lining. The Final Girl stands close enough to observe the peach-pit wrinkle of the skin. He calls her name, spreads his legs wider.
The bikini girls inch closer to the other boys, flirt-talk with them; the Final Girl looks away, wants to close her eyes and hear nothing. He calls her name once more. She hates diving off the board, the spectacle of it, the water pounding her ears, yet there she waits her turn. She doesn’t know why she is in line for what she doesn’t want, only that this is how a summer day is spent.
In his book Ways of Seeing, John Berger writes that women, in the process of being conditioned to focus on appearance rather than action, internalize a system that is not their own: “Women watch themselves being looked at.
This determines not only most relations between men and women but also the relation of women to themselves. The surveyor of a woman in herself is male.” I cannot think of a pool from my past without imagining myself as the object on the other side of a lens. It is as though I am remembering myself, for somebody else.
Perhaps the layered awareness isn’t surprising given I spent so many hours of my life watching films that were about me, but not for me. Slasher films from the ’70s and ’80s, the body of work Clover studies and the body of work I grew up consuming, were written about women, but by and for men. The male writer knew that the male viewer wouldn’t be interested in seeing men as victims, nor in seeing men fail in their quest, and so the Final Girl was born.
As a protagonist who suffers hit after hit, horror after horror, she provides a proxy; male viewers can distance themselves from a drawn-out narrative of victimhood and at the same time feel secure that a Joey or Charlie saved the day. The Final Girl is part denial, part projection. She allows the male viewer to leave the cinema feeling entertained, unthreatened.
The male writer knew that the male viewer wouldn’t be interested in seeing men as victims, nor in seeing men fail in their quest, and so the Final Girl was born. Film over, out in daylight, how did I feel? Stuck in the first act, like the Final Girl having a backyard soak, watched by and awaiting some looming terror.
I didn’t identify with the triumph of beating the evil; besides, in film after film, the evil came back. The story always rewound to the beginning, and started again. What happens when the unconscious viewer becomes the conscious subject of another’s narrative? It’s not a simple case of wires crossing. When I consider the roots of slasher films and the Final Girl I saw myself in, the wires seem more like marionette strings.
The annual eighth-grade graduation party. The Final Girl is a teenager. Just. The topography of her body has changed, and therefore, according to the sartorial rulebook of Sports Illustrated, finally merits a bikini. But she will not be swimming at the party. Preserving sprayed bangs, frosted eyelids, and the drugstore perfume on her wrists takes precedence to cooling off in the water.
The girls she calls her friends move in a swarm up and down the concrete deck. June sun electrifies the blue rectangle, its water no longer a source of cooling comfort: It is background lighting for the runway, a magnifier for a one-way gaze.
Boys sit — not on benches, but on the tops of picnic tables, elevated. They wear T-shirts, except for a few who go bare-chested. All of them in baseball caps, fixed backward. Clots of them around the pool.
At the front of the group of girls, the first to be seen is the skinniest. Her pace is slow, almost regal; she breathes heavily. In the winter of that school year she’d started bringing sliced peppers to lunch instead of sandwiches. Her refrain: “I’m not hungry.” The other girls, including the Final Girl, lamely offered cookies, never asked questions other than, “Want some?”
The Final Girl has only seen bones this prominent in a Thanksgiving turkey picked clean. But squint and make the hard lines blur, this girl looks like a model from a magazine. She delivers herself for viewing. And the boys are watching.
Look pretty, be nice, be liked. There are yearbooks to be signed. The Final Girl passes a table of boys and one of them calls her over, asks to swap signatures. A couple of months before when he’d asked her out, she’d agreed, though they never went anywhere, did anything.
Where would they have gone? To the empty parking lot of the shuttered-up video store? For a few weeks he held her hand in the hallway at school. She had the sense that something was expected of her, but if the boy wanted something, he never said. Now, she trades her yearbook for his. Have a great summer, she writes. Signs her name, then draws a smiley face next to it.
He has just finished writing and, not smiling, hands her yearbook to her. She hasn’t been this close to him for months, and notices that his face has grown hair, a proud sling of it beneath his chin, which he scratches. Darker patches bloom beneath his arms. A wave of jealousy slaps her: he has the liberty to show what she must shave.
How I felt watching horror films was how I felt at pools. Drawn to them, sensing, but confused by my role in them, by an unidentifiable yet understood imperative to comply. My real-life pools were Terrible Places in a distorted, phantom translation of the horror trope. I recognize this, my body told me. Beware.
There wasn’t a mass grave beneath the community pool. There wasn’t a murderer cornering me in the deep end. But tell that to the body. Those years of discomfort after discomfort: Maybe my body was telling me to get the hell out of the Terrible Place, and I just didn’t know how. But how do you act for yourself when you’ve been conditioned to do the opposite?
The male gaze on the female body isn’t without consequence, not in any setting, especially not in a pool. The culturally endorsed surveillance of the gazer creates the culturally endorsed hyper-vigilance of the watched. Intuition and power drain from a woman’s body as a result. Horror films know this. The viewer is safe in his seat; the viewed is not.
What does it mean to be the body that bolsters someone else’s narrative? Not all horror films depend on a Final Girl as a character, but they do depend on the female body. Clover’s chapter on occult films — horror that focuses on the paranormal — outlines this cinematic “standard scheme” that puts “the female body on the line only in order to put the male psyche on the line.”
The Exorcist provides a classic example. We think the film is about the possessed teenager Reagan, but Clover writes that her story is “significant only insofar as it affects the lives of others, above all the tormented spiritual life of Karras,” the priest. Reagan’s story, she explains, is an “accessory” story. A grotesque spectacle of projectile vomit to contrast the male’s sacred inner journey.
The seeming reticence of American horror to move past this standardized narrative makes me wonder what larger, offscreen force is keeping us frozen, rooted in our spot. Plenty of years have passed since 1993, when Clover published her book — and plenty of horror films have been made in those decades that disrupt and redefine female roles in the genre. We’ve moved past those slasher paradigms, right?
The female character isn’t always the subordinate protagonist, projected onto, granted narrative agency only in order to put the male psyche on the line. But many of these films, like Jennifer Kent’s Babadook and Julia Ducournau’s Raw, are not American. In Australia, France, and elsewhere, filmmakers are using horror to explore a female perspective for its own value — not in relation to the imagined male gaze.
The seeming reticence of American horror to move past this standardized narrative makes me wonder what larger, offscreen force is keeping us frozen, rooted in our spot. Putting the female body on the line only in order to put the male psyche on the line: Clover might as well be describing the culture of American patriarchy.
A large wood-paneled room heaves with government officials, reporters, cameras. In her testimony for the sexual assault hearing of Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh, professor Christine Blasey Ford talks about a pool — a private country club in Chevy Chase, Maryland, where she was a member of the diving team. Most of her teenage summers were spent there, including the day she attended a gathering at a nearby home, where, as she states in her testimony, Kavanaugh assaulted her.
Watching the Ford-Kavanaugh hearings, I had no trouble picturing the pool in Chevy Chase. I’d never been there, but had been a guest at comparable country clubs in Baltimore. The gatehouse. The parking lot filled with European cars, rear windows stickered with names of expensive private schools. These are places of extreme privilege, but inside the privet hedge the story that unfolds is the same one that unfolds inside chain link.
One of the first exchanges Ford has is with Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley, who in a terse but respectful manner asks her to speak up. In an action that a fictional narrative would foreground to establish character, Ford attempts to adjust her microphone to accommodate Grassley’s request. It refuses to move, stuck at the level of her breastbone, but instead of insisting on a replacement, Ford offers to lean forward and down so the senator can hear her.
“Is that good for you?” she asks in a beseeching voice, head submissively lowered. Throughout the next three hours of her testimony, she must assume this stooped posture to be heard. The behavior is in keeping with Ford’s flexibility when questioned; she often replies to interlocutors that she is happy to discuss traumatic events further. “Whatever you want,” she says on one occasion. She wants, as she says repeatedly, to be helpful.
Watching Ford speak about that fateful teenage summer, I remembered being 15 and the mother of my private-school boyfriend telling me, in flinty disparagement, that I was “nice, for a public school girl.” I’m pleased I never reached the lofty standards of the country club set, but I recognized the accommodating behavior I saw in Ford at the hearing all the same. It was the same behavior I practiced any time I went to a pool. It was a character note in a shared script.
The pool is central to Ford’s account of her assault. She notes that on the night of the attack, her assailant “had a hard time” as he tried to strip her naked; having been at the pool earlier, she was still wearing a one-piece beneath her clothes. This detail haunts me. Saved by a one-piece.
I find it difficult not to dwell on the sequence of that day. Diving practice, then sexual assault. Few sports require so much sheer trust in the body and one’s conditioning. To walk out on the board, the platform, to be so focused in the moment. To have that amount of control and self-possession. The consequences of poor technique or misstep so disastrous and painful.
Then and now, the narrative was set: Her story was an accessory, one that would put the male psyche on the line, but ultimately at rest. The experience was hers, but not the narrative. Horror films are rife with misstep — and a gender discrepancy built into that misstep. Clover again: “Boys die, in short, not because they are boys, but because they make mistakes. Some girls die for the same mistakes. Others, however, and always the main ones, die — plot after plot develops the motive — because they are female.”
In the Senate hearing, you see the psychic weight unloaded onto Ford all those years ago. Then and now, the narrative was set: Her story was an accessory, one that would put the male psyche on the line, but ultimately at rest. The experience was hers, but not the narrative.
Kavanaugh’s opening statement gives a clear hint; its rhetorical stance isn’t beseeching, but imperative. Look at this, ask yourself, tell me: He commands us to do and see what he wants. He portrays himself as a meticulous documentarian upholding patrilineal tradition, having kept a calendar of his daily life from high school onward, just like his father. Even his questions are orders: You want to know what happened on a certain date? Look in my calendar. There is only room for his version.
But in the course of the hearing, other documents are brought to Kavanaugh’s attention — documents that do not align with his self-designed narrative. His yearbook entry, for example, paints a portrait of partying excess riddled with pride in sexual crusades, not of the illustrious academic achievement and hard work Kavanaugh indefatigably invokes during the hearing.
He dodges questions about the entry’s authenticity by saying that he wrote something and submitted it to the yearbook editors, who may have taken liberties. I find this astonishing, that a teenager who listed every lawn mowed and weight lifted in hard copy calendars that he still has to this day, who annotated the events he listed in those calendars because they were “forward-looking as well as backward-looking,” would yield to a yearbook editor who — as Kavanaugh insists — decided to misrepresent the entire school as a combination of Animal House and Fast Times at Ridgemont High.
The hearing shows in a glaring light what a man used to controlling his story looks like when he has to endure counterinterpretations. We see him bristle at the slightest suggestion that his version is not blindly upheld as gospel.
The Ford-Kavanaugh hearing was my horror film of 2018. Just like the presidential debates between Trump and Clinton were in 2016. My brain knew the difference, but my body didn’t. Scythed-out stomach, fist in throat, pulse-roar in ears — I could have been seven years old, watching Friday the 13th.
It’s the feeling that accompanies the moment the female will be slaughtered for the sake of the male’s story. It’s a feeling that, for so many women, has become normalized, if not expected. Slash slash. In the end, though, the male psyche is restored. He is challenged, but vindicated. He makes it to the third act of his journey with ever-expanding power. He sits on his bench.
The Final Girl is full of agency, but it’s not hers to exercise. At the core she is passive because she is a character devised for male safety and pleasure. Am I still talking about the Final Girl of horror films? I don’t know. At some point the line blurs. At some point we begin talking about real women, real bodies. The Final Girl is fiction and yet her story, her script, bleeds into real female experience.
The Final Girl and her friend walk through a labyrinth of vinyl-tiled corridors to the women’s locker room. They change, the Final Girl fussing with the adjustable straps of a bikini two sizes too small, the friend in street clothes one minute, ready for laps the next breath. Her racing one-piece is simple, unadorned and functional, like the silicone cap into which she tucks her hair.
As they walk to the pool, the Final Girl keeps her focus on the concrete deck; head down she is more likely to avoid an awkward run-in with a professor. She checks to make sure a tuft of hair isn’t sticking out of her suit’s crotch seam and lowers herself into the slow lane, several away from the friend.
The cold water stabs at her pores, and she throws herself into a loud, uncoordinated breaststroke. What was she meant to do with her hands — close the fingers or spread them? Her muscle memory is devoted to policing pubic hair, not recalling proper swimming technique.
There is no such misallocation for the friend. She swims in peace and efficiency. The water sluicing over her cap, over her shoulders as they turn in unhurried, rhythmic rotation. Her fluttering feet make no splash, only carve a fleeting sculpture on the water’s surface. She doesn’t stop, not even once — not to adjust the seams of her suit, not to fix her hair, and certainly not to scan her surroundings to see if she is being watched.
When I left Baltimore for college, I left behind those summers at the pool, but carried the learning from them with me. The first friend I made was someone also versed in pools, but in a different language. She was a skilled swimmer who grew up in Canada.
When one day she suggested we visit the university pool together, I was reluctant — it was the brittle end of winter, my eczema was flaring — but I was also intrigued. She’d told me, in our walks around Philadelphia, about the years of cold 4 a.m. mornings, the muscle pulls, the mania and stillness of the team meets. I’d never seen a trained swimmer at work. It can be a thrill to see someone operating in her element.
She had short hair too. An athletic build. But she was not a Final Girl; she was someone in possession of herself. You can be in the mold of a Final Girl but resist the definition. And the pool for her was not a Terrible Place, but a site of physical strength and accomplishment.
In a 2019 New York Times piece, Amanda Hess notes that filmmakers are increasingly reframing the pool not as “a straightforward tool for satisfying the male gaze,” but “a place where a woman can be the complicated subject, with her own issues and her own fantasies.”
The projects that achieve this narrative recasting — films like Eighth Grade and television series like Shrill — are not in the horror genre, but the paradigm of the gaze is similar, as are the questions raised. What happens when a female protagonist in a pool creates meaning not to satisfy male expectations, when she doesn’t flee from the force that threatens to harm her? What happens in that story — and whose is it?
Perhaps the true Terrible Place is where the self of one’s creation faces the self of internalized systems. How do you battle that invisible monster? How do you disentangle your own story about yourself from the one you are told, the one you’ve embodied?
When my daughter was 13, she asked me to tell her the story of her birth. The question, which she’d asked many times before, was in this instance context-specific. We had just finished watching the first episode of The Umbrella Academy, and I suspect its opening scene lingered in her mind, as it did in mine.
A sleek teenage girl, suited and capped for swim practice, flirts with a similarly clad boy as they wait for an aqua exercise class to finish. She plants a kiss on his cheek and runs off, leaping into the water. Seconds pass without her resurfacing. Blue water gurgles red. Finally, with a gasp, the girl surfaces, but she is no longer sleek: She is nine months pregnant, and in the throes of a tormented labor.
Tell me the story of my birth, I remember asking my mother. I remember the way the story smelled of alcohol, as if every unpleasant detail had been rubbed clean. Birth stories, especially as told to one’s own children, are narrative acts — often acts of narrative compliance, narrative editing. One must follow the script. Laden with gendered expectations, the laboring female body isn’t so different from the teenage female body.
January, a bleak palate of grays. The Final Girl is overdue by a week. Fluid pools at her ankles, yeast infections haunt her like poltergeists. She has received much guidance on how to usher the birth along: dust skirting boards, eat spicy foods.
A family friend swears that watching the latest James Bond in a movie theater instigated her childbirths. The Final Girl sits through Casino Royale with not even a Braxton-Hicks. Pleased to have cleared herself of debt to the franchise, she tries again a few days later with another film. The only one that fits her schedule is almost too ironic to induce labor: Children of Men.
I was six months pregnant when I moved to London, and desperate to find a place to live that fell in the catchment area for a local hospital with a decent obstetrics ward. By chance, I ended up renting down the street from a pool, the newly opened London Fields Lido.
With a climate arguably committed to oppressive clouds and rain, London didn’t strike me as the ideal place for outdoor aquatic enjoyment. But in the 1930s there had been a lido in that same park, and the city, as I learned, had a long history not only of outdoor swimming, but wild swimming.
I’d never thought of swimming as a wild act. Londoners had: For a hundred years the ponds in Hampstead Heath had offered year-round water access to bathers, including a pond reserved exclusively for women. In the later Victorian era endurance races in the Thames were popular, celebrated events. The most famous competitor from the time was Agnes Beckwith, a 14-year-old who attracted cheering crowds as she swam 10- to 20-mile races along the city’s river.
She was hailed as a model for women — admittedly not because of her ambition and skill, but because Victorian doctors endorsed swimming as childbearing preparation. Healthy women gave birth to healthy men; a woman swimming was a woman exercising for the Empire. Still, the swimming culture in London departed from the script of suburban pools I knew.
And what exactly did I know about being pregnant, about childbearing? Little, other than that everyone had an opinion on what I should and should not do. Gestation brought with it constant judgment, constant inspection of my body. A nine-month-long, eighth-grade pool party.
At the time, water births were popular in the U.K. The general sentiment among pregnant women and midwives was that the method provided more agency, and in turn led to better obstetric outcomes. You could do the water birth in hospital, or call the National Health Service and have a temporary birthing pool installed at home and give birth there.
Having recently moved from New York City and out of the American health care system, I couldn’t begin to absorb this scenario of government-funded options, not even when I registered at the local hospital and was given the grand tour of the “Aqua Suite.” Its large bathtub looked nothing like a pool, but afterwards, when the nurse led me back to the small examination room where she took my blood pressure and ushered me on the scale, she made the connection: “Mums love the pool. Some wear bikinis, like they’re on holiday. You’ll think about it, won’t you?”
I tried to visualize the labor there, but all I knew was the preferred narrative from the birth classes I had started to take, which was at once hazily sketched and defined by harsh borders. No drugs, a puff of gas and air if you must, avoid the bed at all costs, keep in constant movement, squat, crouch, did we mention no drugs — so the stage directions went. But it was easiest to remember the birth narratives from films I’d seen.
I tried to put myself in the pool in a bikini, breathing steadily, but then I saw myself in a gown from waist up, sweating a little, just enough that my cheeks were pleasingly flushed. The hair around my face beginning to curl. And then the camera pulled back to me propped in a hospital bed, smiling, holding a cooing, swaddled infant in my arms.
I told the midwife I wasn’t sure. She patted my arm and advised me to keep the Aqua Suite in mind when the time came. But I didn’t. Prioritizing women’s comfort in a pool? I couldn’t conceive of it. The Final Girl hobbles through the automatic doors with a birth plan. Printed on paper, folded and tucked into her overnight bag. Only it isn’t a plan. It is somebody else’s script.
She hands the paper to the nurse, who thanks her, perfunctorily slips the paper beneath the intake sheet on her clipboard, and never refers to the paper again. It was as though the Final Girl had handed the nurse a pile of yarn and called it a hat. Here was another woman with absolutely no clue.
To have a clue, you need to understand your options, your risks. You consult yourself: If I feel x, I will do y. The Final Girl had written down commands, but hadn’t asked herself. She had accepted the story without asking if it was the one she wanted.
In childbirth, she is not in a pool but she is in a Terrible Place — the most bodily concentrated pain of her life, face to face with a story she doesn’t want.
If I edit for my daughter, it is to add back in all that decorum and conformist values would prefer I leave out. The broken intercom that played a Spanish radio drama for the first several hours of labor and that I swore at incessantly. The contractions that swarmed in my lower spine, not anywhere close to my abdomen, as women are so commonly told.
How I finally begged for an epidural but because of the late stage of labor and my scoliosis the relief was muted. The paper bowls of vomit lined up along the bedside table, the smear of shit on the mattress that spread as I tried to push out what felt alternatively like a prize-winningly giant watermelon and a saber-length Rambo knife, and which was in fact a tiny human head fracturing my tailbone.
“Maybe it would have been better to jump in the pool like the girl in the show,” my daughter says. Maybe. Sometimes we accept and hold onto the wrong story — someone else’s story —  and for too long. We are the most dangerous to ourselves when we are not consuming consciously, when we are not scrutinizing what we have consumed, when we follow a narrative without understanding its potency.
Stories are seductive like that, be they horror films, social standards, myth. But stories are also malleable. If narrative can be an act of compliance, it can also be an act of creation.
I don’t offer a birth story to align resolution with reproduction. Nor to align birth with female identity. It is an event, like any other, of potential meaning-making, but because it has at its center the body of a woman, the narrative becomes contested, public domain. It is an event where internalized conditioning that might come from films as much as from real life skews choice, and with troubling consequences. A woman’s body, but whose story?
Two years after my daughter’s birth, I was pregnant again. This birth would not be a rerun of the last; my body demanded a revised perspective, and I listened. A placental complication required induction on the due date. There would be no sudden strike of labor, and, I decided, no martyred withholding of pain relief. I was determined to narrate this time, to assert my agency — this birth would be by me.
I did keep one element constant: watching a film the night before labor. As much as I had been tracking the gestational calendar, I had been tracking the release date of a horror film that I knew little about except that it was Swedish, and that I was driven by what felt like an instinctual need to see it.
There is no Final Girl in Let the Right One In. The film follows the bullied, adolescent Oskar and his relationship with Eli, a new neighbor in his suburban Stockholm apartment building. Shy, reclusive, androgynous, Eli happens to be a vampire, one linked to a string of deaths in town. Despite the dangers of befriending someone who survives on human blood, Oskar forms a bond with her. Theirs is a mutually supportive connection: Oskar accepts Eli’s vampiric ways, and Eli shares in Oskar’s pain of being hunted.
In the climax of the film, the most sadistic of Oskar’s torturers — a male teenage jock — drags him into an indoor pool and pins him beneath the water’s surface. Such is the reasonable retaliation in jock world for the minor infraction of breaking a hockey stick. Underwater, choked, Oskar struggles for air, and as the seconds tick by it seems impossible that he will escape. A horror film’s male protagonist in need of saving; who, or what, could possibly intervene?
Enter Eli. Perfect turquoise water turns ghoulishly turbid as she feasts on the bully and his sidekicks, hauling them around the pool, sating herself and, in the process, saving her friend. I stood my pregnant body up in that movie theater and cheered. Eli is not the Final Girl who suffers hit after hit. Eli is the Hero-Monster who gets the job done. She wasn’t going to swap yearbooks with the bully and write, “Have a Great Summer.” She was going to eat him alive.
I awoke the next morning, optimistic and lighthearted. I request drugs at the first screech of back labor. I recline in a bed. I even wear a gown. My doctor, a middle-aged woman with a severe buzz cut and an art teacher aesthetic, calls herself the Dragon Lady. “I get what I want, and it scares people,” she offers by way of explanation.
The Dragon Lady checks in now and then. To my left, the window projects a rectangle of honeyed April light onto the floor. The daily crossword is spread on my lap, my husband sits by my side. After a few hours the Dragon Lady asks if I feel ready, and I do. I am present, in tune with my body, unfettered. I destroyed the crossword. I have never felt stronger.
I labored not in anyone else’s character; I labored as myself. I was not Oskar tossed into a pool, needing to be saved. Maybe I was a bit like Eli, slaying the opposition: the baggage of a difficult previous birth, my skewed perceptions of how a body should weather the process, the assumptions about the pain I should, as a woman, endure. And though I wasn’t aware of it at the time, I was slaying my inner Final Girl too. How right that a horror film helped me do it.
After a few hours the Dragon Lady asks if I feel ready, and I do. I am present, in tune with my body, unfettered. I destroyed the crossword. I have never felt stronger. Narrative is a powerful thing. In the Middle Ages it was thought that the words and illustrations on a page worked their way into their readers’ bodies, and that from those images and concepts, embodied as they were, people were able to comprehend and derive meaning from the world around them.
I know I had experienced something like that process in that night before the birth of my second child, as the image of Eli and the bloody pool replayed in my head. I know I had experienced something like that, too, all those years ago watching slasher after slasher before I could understand what was narrative structure, and what was life. Where the Final Girl ended, and I began. What narrative I wanted to choose, or craft for myself.
Clover writes that the Terrible Place for Final Girls is “a site of self-awareness, of knowing who they are and what they face.” In this definition, the Terrible Place sounds, well, not so terrible. It’s a place I needed to discover. It’s a place I want my daughter, in her final months of eighth grade, to find, and emerge from unscathed. The Terrible Place can be the start of a good story, if it’s one that you direct for yourself.
In the last few years, I have taken to wild swimming. To flinging myself into ribbons of swift water, grass-clotted ponds, the raging sea, and — my favorite — a still, black lake. Places that resist man-made framing. Places with undetermined depths, boundaries the swimmer decides for herself. Places lifted right out of the horror film schema. Terrible, terrible places.
Limbs extended, I float in moon-polished water. Starfished. I have drifted away from my small group of friends, out into the lake’s middle. What peaceful, summer idyll. Cool air kneads my bare skin. I drag in its scent of dried pine, study the midnight sky, its sugar smear of stars. The only sounds are the watery swish of my arms and legs, my steady breathing.
This is not the story of a murderer lurking on the shore. Of an evil, benthic dweller waiting to attack. There is no generalized male viewer to entertain or put at ease. This is the story of a woman alone, safe, her attention unscripted.
Long before we were human, we were microbes, and from a common ancestor we evolved into the many creatures that led to us being who we are today. But our relationship to the microbial world is not in the past, and while the COVID-19 pandemic has brought one aspect of that interconnection into sharp relief, it is not the whole picture. Beneficial microbes make up our microbiome, which serves as one foundation to our physical health, but they also make our world more delicious, more fizzy, and more fun.
We eat and drink fermented foods every day, shaped by what fermentation expert Sandor Katz calls “the transformative actions of microbes” that give us cheese, coffee, black tea, tempeh, cured meats, soy sauce, alcohol, miso, vinegar, fish sauce, and a host of other foods. Ferments are found, to varying extents, in every culture and cuisine on earth, and the history of their production is deeply interwoven with our own.
I began my own fermentation journey over a decade ago, as an answer to the question of how to put up the bumper crop of cabbages in my garden. Over the years, my practice has blossomed to include koji (the mold used for miso, shoyu, and sake, among other things), cheesemaking, yogurt, alcohol, vinegar, and an assortment of pickled fruits and veggies.
I begin each and every day with fermentation, incorporating it into a mindfulness practice as a key moment of my morning routine: one that’s just for me, and lets me practice curiosity and play with abandon. Fermentation has given me the gift of a beautiful community, too, and I’ve been lucky to spend time learning and teaching alongside some of the people whose writing inspired this list.
My hope is, in reading it, you find a way to plug into that community yourself, or to dive deeper into your fermentation explorations. There are many resources out there that investigate the what of fermentation, including the process and how to make certain dishes. But here, we’re focusing on the why: These pieces all highlight the wondrous, almost magical process of fermentation, and perhaps will inspire you to make some fermentation magic of your own.
Or very practical information: how do you grow carrots? How do you grow squash? What is the season? When do you plant those seeds? When do you harvest those? How do you cook those? How do you ferment them? All of this is cultural information and it’s not that any of it is, in terms of cultivation, none of it is metaphorical. I mean it’s all important things that we’re seeking to pass down from generation to generation that are outside of our genes.
And of course we talk about yogurt cultures and introducing a culture in the ferment. So in the cultivation of microorganisms on our food—which is what we’re doing in fermentation—we use the same word, “culture,” to describe the community of bacteria that turn milk into yogurt that we use to describe language, belief systems and the totality of what we’re trying to pass down generation to generation.
Microbes are at the root of healthy soil, the root of animal digestion and the root of, well, roots. In forests we have a couple of interesting things happening: Microbes in the soil break down organic matter, producing the nutrients needed for plants to thrive. And then other microbes, forming dense mycelial networks, move these nutrients to where they need to go. Definitely a moment of microbial magic!
I have been enamored with Simard’s work for years, and with her willingness to take a risk to study what she knew to be important: When she started her research, few of her colleagues understood what she was doing or why. But Simard, who saw monoculture forests failing on the same land where diverse old-growth forests had thrived, knew there was an answer in the soil, and her team explores it through scholarly articles like Mapping the Wood-Wide Web, and through her new book, Finding The Mother Tree.
This interview with Ferris Jabr takes a closer look at her work and into her as a person. I stepped away feeling like I knew the person behind the work a bit better, and had a more intimate understanding of how the unseen world influences what we see.
An old-growth forest is neither an assemblage of stoic organisms tolerating one another’s presence nor a merciless battle royale: It’s a vast, ancient and intricate society. There is conflict in a forest, but there is also negotiation, reciprocity and perhaps even selflessness.
The trees, understory plants, fungi and microbes in a forest are so thoroughly connected, communicative and codependent that some scientists have described them as superorganisms. Recent research suggests that mycorrhizal networks also perfuse prairies, grasslands, chaparral and Arctic tundra — essentially everywhere there is life on land.
Together, these symbiotic partners knit Earth’s soils into nearly contiguous living networks of unfathomable scale and complexity. “I was taught that you have a tree, and it’s out there to find its own way,” Simard told me. “It’s not how a forest works, though.”
One of my favorite parts of studying fermentation is how many surprising small moments it contains. These little gems come up often in my research on fermentation (did you know, for example, that ketchup comes from fish sauce?), but I also encounter them in conversations with fellow fermenters. Perhaps your own history contains a fermented food that’s tied to a strong family memory (for me, it’s Amish friendship bread, among other things), or one that sparked a moment of exploration or discovery.
William Rubel, an expert on the history of bread, wrote this piece in 2006, and I first encountered it when doing research on 17th-century author Gervase Markham. I revisited it recently, and fell in love again with Rubel’s writing — particularly his ability to make an unwieldy subject compelling to the reader.
Horse bread, which as you might guess is bread made for horses, was an important part of English horse care in the early modern period. More nutritionally dense than hay or grains, it was considered such an important part of English transportation infrastructure (remember, transportation back then ran on the backs of horses!) that it had its own laws.
English law recognized two classes of bread — bread for people and bread for horses — and the latter were heavily regulated, being a critical source of nutrition for the country’s horses. Leavened breads were, as Rubel writes, “elite breads for elite animals,” and were widely in use for centuries. His opening paragraph sets the stage:
In the summer of 1415, the Aragonese ambassadors on their way to the court of Henry v purchased horse-bread every day, spending more on horse-bread than on practically anything else. Don Quixote bragged to an innkeeper that his horse was the finest that ever ate bread.
The fermentation industry is always moving and changing, and its transformations can serve as metaphors not only for our world as it is, but for the world it might become. Miin Chan’s writing brings to light an issue in the world of fermented food production, and in our conversations around fermentation: lack of diversity, cultural appropriation, and the role of fermentation companies in gentrification.
This manifests in a variety of ways, from the language we use to describe our food (for example, calling tibicos “water kefir”) to the fact that white producers and authors are often given greater access to funding and media attention, particularly if products are rebranded and divorced from their cultural roots.
In this piece, Chan asks us to consider the world of fermentation as it is so that we can build something stronger: one connects our foods to the traditions, people, and place in which they’re rooted.
Wherever you look, you’ll see that the fermentation industry in the West (meaning North America, the U.K., Europe, and Australasia) is dominated by mostly white fermenters, who often sell whitewashed BIPOC ferments and associated white-gaze narratives about these foods to mainly white consumers.
This dearth of diversity is problematic in and of itself, but it’s worsened by the fact that white fermenters are commoditizing ferments that are ingrained in the cultural identities of BIPOC, whose centuries-long labor developed and refined the microbial relationships required to produce them.
The art of fermentation gives us a wealth of metaphors, inspiration, and transformations as we try to understand the world around us, but it also functionally provides us with food that’s delicious. In other words, while the process of fermentation as a whole is magic, the taste of ferments is magical, too: savory and sour in a way non-fermented foods could only dream of being.
In the hands of a skilled writer like Jenny Dorsey, that magic translates onto the page. I love this piece because it combines the how-to of fermentation with the pure pleasure of reading beautiful words about a beloved dish.
Five days, the color of the ribs have deepened considerably and the once-thick paste has unwound. I cut open the bags and take a whiff of its contents. The pungency of the garlic is gone, replaced by mellow sour notes accentuated with a pleasant, sake-like scent.
I grill up each rib with great relish, every window in my apartment flung open, the char of meat and rice filling my nostrils and eyes. It takes another hour to finish the cooking process, but it’s all worth the work for that first bite: sour and salty, with an umami-rich fragrance that keeps me salivating and craving more.
Years ago, during a stop in Phnom Penh while on a backpacking trip through Southeast Asia, I visited Tuol Sleng, a museum of the Cambodian genocide, and Choeung Ek, the killing fields. Both were places where thousands of victims of the Khmer Rouge had been murdered; now, tourists moved along their hallways and paths, mostly in silence.
After leaving, I couldn’t stop thinking about my visit. The terrible history of what had happened at these sites haunted me, as did their material remains, but so did the troubling decision I made to be there at all. Why had I chosen to go to these places?
It felt like a responsibility, in a way — to learn about the country I was traveling through, to pay my respects, clumsily, to the dead — but I was disturbed, too, by what I had done. Was I just a voyeur of other people’s pain?
Sites like these fall under the umbrella of what can be called difficult heritage: the places, artifacts, stories, and practices that we have inherited from the past, and use, in some fashion, today. We tangle our presents together with our pasts.
As an American I know the stories we tell about our history as a nation, and the icons in which they are rooted: the Liberty Bell; the Mayflower; the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution that are on display in the National Archives. People often think of heritage as something they’re proud of, a unifying point around which to coalesce.
But heritage comprises the horrible parts of history, too, the ones many would prefer to forget, or over which societies continue to come into conflict. In America, plantations and buildings still standing today, built by enslaved people, are part of our heritage; so are the sites of battles and the stolen lands that were part of the genocide against Native populations.
After that trip to Cambodia, I went on to study difficult heritage professionally as an archaeologist and anthropologist of Rwanda. I learned how Rwandans were using the remains of their terrible past — the genocide committed against the Tutsi population in 1994 — in memorials that served as sites of mourning but also places of memory and education (and, for that matter, tourism, just like the Cambodian ones).
In a way, the next decade of my life was shaped by those questions to which I had no good answers. Not only the ones about what I was doing there as a tourist encountering mass atrocity, but even broader ones, too: What do we do now with heritage that raises questions about pain, suffering, and our human pasts as both victims and perpetrators? How do we make these decisions today, and who has the right to do so? What kinds of values and politics guide our choices?
Even purportedly straightforward and “unifying” heritage has its faultlines: The Declaration of Independence’s “We the People” can mean something quite different to the descendants of Americans who weren’t counted as fully human in 1776 than to the descendants of those who were.
Once you start digging, as the pieces in this reading list do, you find difficult heritage all around you. Museums are full of art and artifacts taken by colonial and genocidal forces. Public monuments commemorate people whose legacies are often, to put it gently, conflicted.
Even cultural practices that are today seen as cheerful or entertaining can mask darker pasts, like Sweden’s Easter witches, who bring something like Halloween to springtime.
As the global protests calling for the removal of controversial statues and monuments in recent years have shown, people care deeply about what we do with the objects and places that make up our heritage — what we save, and what we destroy. What we do with heritage reflects how we understand ourselves: who we were, who we are, and who we want to be.
Sites that memorialize tragedy and atrocity can be found all over the world, from Phnom Penh to Auschwitz to Rwanda, and these sites are visited by survivors, mourners, and tourists. The tension between paying respects and bearing witness, and exploiting or gawking, is unresolved; maybe it’s unresolvable.
Steve Kandell’s essay about the opening of the 9/11 Memorial Museum in New York City is a raw personal account of confronting this tension. After his sister’s death in the Twin Towers, Kandell and his family did not participate in the development of the memorial museum;
his story here recounts what happened when he decided to visit. His powerful, painful ambivalence about the memorial reminds us that even when history has been packaged up for public consumption, it also remains very present, personal, and agonizing for so many.
I think now of every war memorial I ever yawned through on a class trip, how someone else’s past horror was my vacant diversion and maybe I learned something but I didn’t feel anything. Everyone should have a museum dedicated to the worst day of their life and be forced to attend it with a bunch of tourists from Denmark.
Annotated divorce papers blown up and mounted, interactive exhibits detailing how your mom’s last round of chemo didn’t take, souvenir T-shirts emblazoned with your best friend’s last words before the car crash. And you should have to see for yourself how little your pain matters to a family of five who need to get some food before the kids melt down. Or maybe worse, watch it be co-opted by people who want, for whatever reason, to feel that connection so acutely.
In spring, the historic core of Karlskrona, a city on Sweden’s southern coast, was decorated for Easter. Multicolored feathers were tied to bushes and, if I’d been there at the right time, a colleague told me, I could’ve seen little girls walking around in long, flowing clothes, with round red spots of makeup on their cheeks.
“They’re the Easter witches!” she explained. “We used to love dressing up like that when we were kids.” I’d never heard of an Easter witch, so I pressed her. “Like Halloween!” she offered, adding that with the importation of that holiday from the U.S., Swedish children now have two run-around-town-demanding-candy festivals per year.
The Easter witches are called “påskkärringar,” and in this piece, Jennie Tiderman-Österberg traces the history of Swedish witches — or, rather, the country’s history of accusations of witchcraft, which resulted in the brutal deaths of a horrifying number of people (almost entirely women), particularly in the late 17th-century period called the Great Noise.
In Sweden, we meet the suffering by basically playing around with the Easter Hag. Since the 1800s, she is the tradition. She has become our heritage, not the events which lie hidden in her background. Do Swedes do this to cope with a difficult recollection?
Or to reminisce over the times before the witch trials when spells were not an evil act and the cunning women of the forest an important part of our healthcare system? Or do we dress our children as witches because we prefer to make quaint a wildness we still secretly fear?
When the news broke several months ago that the Smithsonian planned to return its collection of Benin Bronzes, it was met with relief from the Nigerian claimants — and surprise from observers who thought major Western museums would continue to fight tooth and nail to retain every item in their collections.
These stunning bronze figures had been looted from the Kingdom of Benin by attacking British forces in the late 19th century, and they have been held in Western museums and private collections ever since. Requests for their return have mainly fallen upon deaf ears, as cultural institutions assert that returns would devastate their collections, or that the objects could not be adequately cared for elsewhere.
Still, the Smithsonian’s change of position is not unique: Perhaps reflecting the start of a reckoning with colonial histories, recent years have seen an increasing number of returns, even as the total amount remains small.
In this piece, Tarisai Ngangura takes us through those requests. The article focuses on Africa, a continent whose cultural heritage has been stolen in massive quantities for the benefit of museums and collectors elsewhere.
Ngangura considers what is lost when heritage is taken away; what claimants want returned (and how they hope to use what is returned); and how the beneficiaries of these collections — especially Western museums that have charged admission fees and built reputations on the backs of items gathered by colonial forces — have fought change.
Whether museums in the Western world as we know them will exist in precisely the same form after such a reckoning is an open question. But if our status quo is dependent on ignoring how those museum collections came to be, that’s hardly a bad thing.
“They come into your house while you are sleeping, or when you are awake. They kill half your family. They steal from you. Take your art and your belongings to their country,” said Nana Oforiatta Ayim, curator, filmmaker, and author of The Godchild. “Then they showcase them like, look what I have. I am more powerful than you. Years later, when the world has somewhat righted itself, you ask for them back and they refuse.”
I still remember the first time I saw a mummy. It was in the St. Louis Art Museum, in the 1990s, and I was on a field trip, small enough to be about eye height with the supine mummy’s wrapped feet. As we filed past, I dragged my own feet and had to be ushered along.
The mummy’s painted cartonnage was certainly beautiful, with its delicate illustrations and its carved, serious face. But the wrappings were what transfixed me: a little decayed, a few scattered holes, the dirt of several thousand years. You mean there’s a person in there?
Like the Benin Bronzes, human remains are subject to repatriation claims. Bodies populate museum exhibitions around the world, from Egyptian mummies to those pulled from Europe’s peat bogs, and they serve as the subjects of scientific research, like the bones that are the focus of this story by Lizzie Wade.
The Penn Museum’s Morton collection, an assemblage of human skulls, is named after the scientist Samuel Morton, who used cranial measurements to support his ideas about racial hierarchy and race “science.” Like many other institutions, the Morton collection accumulated its human remains in a process laced with structural violence, targeting those who had less power to prevent their bones from being collected: Black people, Indigenous communities, the enslaved.
Over time, physical and biological anthropologists have tried to use new research approaches to reckon with their discipline’s former efforts to prove white supremacy through bone. Still, using the collection differently doesn’t solve the essential problem: Can museums still hold and study human remains when their owners didn’t give consent? And what should we do with those collections, like the Morton, whose origins are saturated with racism?
After the murder of George Floyd in May 2020 sparked protests for racial justice around the country, more and more people within and outside Penn began to see the Morton collection as a present-day perpetuation of racism and its harms, rather than just a historic example.
Until last summer, most researchers thought “the science is justified because we’re doing it thoughtfully. And this moment brought to bear, no, that’s not enough,” says Rachel Watkins, a Black biological anthropologist at American University.
Even with recent research that strove to be respectful, it was almost always scientists who decided how and why to study the skulls, not their descendant communities, Athreya notes. “We were speaking for people without them at the table,” she says. To move forward ethically, “Those of us in power are going to have to give up some.”
Sometimes we handle difficult heritage by changing or removing it. In order to stop honoring perpetrators of racist violence, activists have taken down Confederate monuments in the U.S., along with statues of Cecil Rhodes in South Africa, King Leopold II in Belgium, and Edward Colston in the U.K.
But the other side of the coin is what we choose to support instead. What lost histories and ignored people can we bring back into, and honor in, our social and political lives? What forgotten heritage sites deserve attention? As we consider what to remove, we might also consider what to restore.
In this piece, Jill Lepore traces attempts to save Black American heritage in the form of burial grounds and human remains. But these efforts are also faced with challenges: Who, for example, gets to make the decisions? (It’s a question Wade also touches on in her story about the Morton skull collection.)
Examining the idea of “descendant communities” and the work of descendants, activists, scholars, and archaeologists, Lepore carefully untangles the complicated sociopolitics involved in trying to treat Black heritage, and Black communities, with the respect and dignity they have long been denied in the American public sphere.
It isn’t merely an academic dispute. The proposed burial-grounds network and graves-protection acts are parts of a larger public deliberation, less the always elusive “national conversation” than a quieter collective act of conscientious mourning, expressed, too, in new monuments and museum exhibits.
History gets written down in books but, like archeology, it can seep up from the earth itself, from a loamy underground of sacred, ancient things: gravestones tucked under elms and tangled by vines; iron-nailed coffins trapped beneath pavement and parking lots and highway overpasses.
How and whether the debates over human remains get resolved holds consequences not only for how Americans understand the country’s past but also for how they picture its future. The dispute itself, along the razor’s edge between archeology and history, is beset by a horrible irony.
Enslavement and segregation denied people property and ancestry. But much here appears to turn on inheritance and title: Who owns these graveyards? Who owns these bones? Who owns, and what is owed?
THIS IS WHAT happens when a mouse trips out: It becomes more curious about other mice and more likely to socialize with them for long periods of time. It becomes less likely to glug massive amounts of alcohol. It wriggles, quavering, like a wet dog shaking off rain. And its head twitches, rapidly, side to side.
Because a mouse on LSD cannot tell you that colors seem brighter or the walls are melting or a guitar solo somehow sounds purple, these head twitches are of tremendous importance to chemist Jason Wallach. “If you want to know if a compound is likely to cause a psychedelic effect in humans,” says Wallach, speaking from his tiny office in the Discovery Center at Saint Joseph’s University in Philadelphia, “you look to the mice, to that twitching.”
These twitch tests—and countless others—are part of Wallach’s mind-bending new mandate, sparked by a late-2019 meeting with the heads of a company called Compass Pathways. The UK-based biotech firm was eyeing the possibilities of developing psychedelic drugs for use in mental health therapies. Its core product was psilocybin, the psychoactive compound in magic mushrooms.
But it needed new chemicals, engineered to deliver consistent, optimized, and potentially radical results. And that meant new chemists. By August 2020, Compass had inked a two-year, $500,000 “sponsored research agreement” with Wallach and the university. The Discovery Center was born.
A few years in, with continued support from the company, Wallach has cooked up scores of novel psychedelics, mailed them off to partner labs for testing on those mice, and then waited—and hoped—for the telltale twitch results.
The chemist, 36 and pale, face framed by a rough red beard and rectangular glasses, can hem and haw a bit when it comes to specifics: “Compass doesn’t want me to give out numbers. I’ll say we’ve made a lot.” It’s in the neighborhood of 150 new drugs, all of which can potentially be patented and sold by Compass.
We are, as you have probably read, in the throes of a “psychedelic renaissance.” Compelling clinical work conducted at New York University, Imperial College, Johns Hopkins, and elsewhere showed that long-outlawed drugs such as N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT), LSD, and psilocybin have terrific potential for treating everything from addiction to Alzheimer’s to end-of-life anxiety.
Pharmaceutical companies have taken note. In 2020 the fledgling psychedelic industry was predicted to balloon to $6.9 billion by 2027—a year later, that estimate increased to over $10 billion. In September 2020, Compass became the first company of its kind to trade on a major stock exchange, debuting on the Nasdaq at an estimated value of more than $1 billion.
So far, none of these companies has brought a psychedelic drug to market, but the thinking is that, through what the clinical literature calls a—“mystical-type experience”—a psychedelic trip that produces feelings of joy, peace, interconnectedness, and transcendence—patients can confront the root causes of various mental maladies.
“I don’t want to use the word cure, but psychedelics can offer long-term healing,” says Florian Brand, the cofounder and CEO of a Berlin-based biotech incubator called Atai Life Sciences, which invested in Compass Pathways. “We have put a lot of money into actually exploring this hypothesis.”
At the Discovery Center, Wallach leads a team of about 15 students, researchers, and technicians. “One thing we do,” he says, “is create new compounds that differ just a bit from classical psychedelics, like psilocybin or LSD.” Slight tweaks in the molecular structure can drastically alter the intensity and character of the psychedelic journey. This ability to fine-tune the contours of a trip—to engineer new modes of experience—is Wallach’s passion.
For years, his lab work seemed utterly niche, bordering on verboten. Mentors discouraged him. There was no money in psychedelics, they said. There were reputational risks. After all, many of these drugs have been ruled by the US Drug Enforcement Administration as possessing “no currently accepted medical use.”
Since the US government declared most psychedelics illegal in 1970, such research had typically been the domain of so-called clandestine chemists, who worked in backyard sheds and underground bunkers, mass-producing trippy new compounds while evading law enforcement.
Wallach wasn’t discouraged. The work felt about as close as one could get, professionally, to pure chemistry, he says—research animated almost entirely by personal curiosity: “What happens if you put a bromine here? What if you move it over there?”
New investment is shaking up those ideals, as firms like Compass rush to capitalize on the results of that curiosity. A few years ago, Wallach was conducting experiments and coauthoring articles for relatively esoteric journals of neuropharmacology. Now his once quiet lab, with its beakers and burners and reports on twitchy mice, is helping usher in a new era of Big Neuropharma—and not everyone in the world of psychedelia is thrilled about it.
Compass has come to embody the potential (and looming threat) of “psychedelic capitalism.” And Wallach is one of its most prized assets. The young chemist is all in. But the financial stakes, and the ideological fault lines emerging as psychedelics go corporate, produce new stresses. “In the long run, this research is valuable,” he says, before giving his head a shake. “But on a day-to-day basis? It does nothing but raise my blood pressure.”
The messages didn’t have the intended effect on Wallach. In fourth grade, when other kids were devouring Goosebumps and Judy Blume paperbacks, he discovered a book in the school library outlining the dangers of various drugs. “Something drew me to it,” he recalls, “that a small amount of powder or material could cause a really strong change in someone’s experience.”
Years later, Wallach had his own psychedelic experiences, and although he demurs on the details, they proved life-altering. “I pretty much dedicated every waking hour almost for the past 15 years to studying them,” he says. “They had a profound impact on how I wanted to spend my life.”
With few sanctioned pathways for making a living studying psychedelics, Wallach enrolled at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, where he studied psychology as a portal to the mysteries of the human psyche. Wallach was especially curious about consciousness: Where do thoughts come from? What’s the difference between the brain and the mind?
How do we perceive things such as taste and sound and color? How do we perceive … anything at all? Not long into his first year of undergrad, Wallach realized that psychology was “a little less empirical” than he had hoped. He switched majors to study cellular and molecular biology.
He examined cannabinoids, the psychoactive compounds in cannabis. A voracious reader of textbooks, he noticed Amazon’s recommendation algorithm pushing two curious titles: PiHKAL and TiHKAL. These chunky reference books from the ’90s were written by Alexander “Sasha” Shulgin—a psychopharmacologist best known for synthesizing MDMA, also known as ecstasy—and his wife, Ann. They contain detailed accounts of various psychoactive compounds, based on firsthand trials conducted by the Shulgins and a close cadre of fellow travelers.
The books are, as a spokesperson for the DEA once put it, “pretty much cookbooks on how to make illegal drugs.” Wallach immediately ordered the two volumes and got cooking. He calls them “probably the most useful tools for answering some of the questions I was interested in at the time, about consciousness and the mind-brain relationship.”
Following the Shulgins’ step-by-step instructions, Wallach taught himself how to make psychedelics. During breaks from school, he threw together an ad hoc lab in the basement of his parents’ stone farmhouse in Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
When his mom started complaining about the smell, he moved the whole operation to a small carriage house on the property. There, Wallach continued to synthesize psychedelics, preparing everything he could physically (and legally) manage. “To be clear,” he says, “I was very paranoid.”
To continue studying psychoactives, when applying for grants he pretended to buy into the same antidrug hysteria he had dismissed as a skeptical schoolkid, framing his research as investigations into dangerous compounds. “The angle was, these are drugs of abuse, and we want to understand them,” he says. “Whatever you have to tell the grant agency.”
Or advanced physics. He wants to keep his brain sharp. Everything feeds back into the research. He assures me that he has interests outside of the hard sciences. He collects antique snuff boxes. He compulsively chews nicotine gum, which he believes sustains his focus. He swears he even chews it while brushing his teeth. He enjoys the odd cigar, too. Save for the occasional scotch, he abstains from alcohol, which he calls ethanol.
“I like the taste,” Wallach says, but he can’t suffer the more mind-dulling effects. “I hate if I even start to feel buzzed at all.” In one conversation, when I ask him how his weekend was, he tells me he spent his days off using plastic model kits to design potential molecules. He has even found himself toiling in the lab on Christmas Day.
In their various states of synthesis and manufacture, psychoactive drugs are decidedly unkaleidoscopic: brownish, yellowish, and vaguely gross, like plaque scraped off nicotine-stained teeth. The labs where these drugs are synthesized smell as if someone were burning a Rotten Eggs Yankee Candle.
Dressed in a faded maroon polo, khakis, and chunky desert boots, Wallach sets up a reaction in a round-bottom flask while explaining that in the ’70s, scientists investigated DPT for use in psychotherapy. He flits around the lab, blasting out moisture from glassware, sealing tubes with argon gas, dissolving reagents in methanol, and advising me to keep my distance as he fiddles with substances that are, he warns, “fairly toxic.” It’s like watching a chef show off at a teppanyaki restaurant, slicing and dicing by pure reflex.
The fall semester is in session, and Wallach has returned, after the pandemic disruption, to in-class teaching. His lab—and its work for Compass—presses on. Wallach and his squad of mostly twentysomethings weave among a few different offices, testing compounds for purity, sketching out molecules in grid-lined notebooks, and preparing potentially mind-expanding substances in discreetly marked mailers to be sent for mouse-twitch tests at a partner lab at UC San Diego.
Full-dose psilocybin trips usually run in excess of six hours. Hand-me-down hippie wisdom dictates three full days for a proper LSD experience: one to prepare, one to trip, and one for reacclimating yourself to the world of waking, non-wiggly consciousness. From a clinical perspective, such epic sessions are expensive and may not be necessary.
Meanwhile, drugs like DMT are acute and intense, with effects lasting only minutes (sometimes called “the businessman’s trip” because it can be enjoyed within a typical lunch hour). Finding what Compass cofounder Lars Wilde calls “the sweet spot” between the length of a trip and clinical efficacy is just one of Wallach’s many challenges. If he and his team of researchers happen upon a concoction that’s particularly potent or experientially unique—“cool” is a word that gets tossed around a lot—well, all the better.
All around the lab, the shelves are cluttered. On a fridge stocked with uncommon chemical provisions is a mission statement scrawled in black Sharpie: “Shoot 4 the stars / land on Mars.” Artwork adorns the walls—impressionist scenes painted in long globs by Wallach himself. Cabinets housing beakers and flasks are decorated with printouts of notable scientists, like a wall of saints.
There’s “father of psychopharmacology” Nathan S. Kline; Albert Hofmann, the Swiss chemist who discovered LSD; and in lab whites and a jaunty beret, smoking an enormous pipe, is Sasha Shulgin, who died in 2014 at the age of 88.
Wallach wouldn’t be working with DPT if it weren’t for Shulgin, who first synthesized the drug. In one of his trip reports, Shulgin describes smoking “many mg” of DPT and being treated to a vision of two rotating hearts, interlocking like something from a drugstore valentine. “Around the outside,” he writes, “there were sparkling jewels or crystals of light of different colors, maybe four rows deep surrounding them all around.”
Shulgin is a key influence for many in Wallach’s lab. “He was authentic and honest, both as a researcher and as a person,” says Jitka Nykodemová, a 27-year-old graduate student who moved from Prague to Philadelphia to work with Wallach.
Shulgin feared that government agents might one day lay fire to his personal records, so he packed his life’s work into a few textbooks. Now, his oeuvre is available online at no cost. Wallach’s operation is more of a closed book. Slinking through the Discovery Center, snapping photos for reference, I’m cautioned against stealing away with any proprietary chemical names or structures. All of the lab’s discoveries belong to Compass, transferred via an “exclusive, royalty-bearing, worldwide license.”
Compass started off as a nonprofit in 2015 but switched, just a year later, to a for-profit model and accepted funding from, among others, controversial venture capitalist Peter Thiel. In December 2019, Compass received a patent for a method of synthesizing psilocybin. To some competitors, the patent seemed to give the company a monopoly on a compound that humans have used for thousands of years.
“It just doesn’t jibe,” says Van der Heyden, 70, “with what a whole group of us—shall I say, people with roots in the ’60s and ’70s—have spent years of their life, and sometimes years in jail, working toward. It’s something that is supposed to be—I don’t know how else to say it—a gift to mankind.”
His objections have an ideological bent. His generation framed the psychedelic experience within hippie-era values of peace, love, and smiling on one’s brother. These drugs were once seen as a tonic: a chemical rejoinder to the culture of corporate profiteering.
Compass has also applied to patent protocols for conducting psychedelic therapy, including conventions that have arguably been part of psychedelic therapy for decades, if not longer, such as soft furniture and “reassuring physical contact.” As one critic put it to me, Compass was trying to patent hugging.
A consortium of chemists and competitors recently challenged Compass’ claims in a patent review trial. Some in the industry maintain that the company’s method of synthesizing psilocybin apes techniques devised by LSD pioneer Hofmann, who filed patents on manufacturing psilocybin over half a century ago.
The charge was spearheaded by Carey Turnbull, a former energy broker who founded a nonprofit watchdog group, Freedom to Operate, to fight psychedelic patent claims. (Among his personal effects at his estate in the gated hamlet of Tuxedo Park, New York: a Chanel-branded, diamond-encrusted statue of the Buddha.)
By signing up you agree to our User Agreement (including the class action waiver and arbitration provisions), our Privacy Policy & Cookie Statement and to receive marketing and account-related emails from WIRED. You can unsubscribe at any time.
Turnbull is also the founder and CEO of Ceruvia Life Sciences, a for-profit company that’s pursuing pharmaceutical applications of psilocybin and other psychedelics. In other words, in addition to playing the role of psychedelia’s patent overreach patrol, Turnbull is Compass’ direct competitor.
In an open letter published on Freedom to Operate’s website, Turnbull claims Compass is “not making good-faith use of capitalism or pharma regulations” by attempting to establish itself as an exclusive, global supplier of psilocybin. In Turnbull’s view, Compass is laying claim to an existing invention (psilocybin, and specifically Hofmann’s synthetic formation) with an intent to “ransom it back to the human race.”
Freedom to Operate recruited a platoon of scientists to examine Compass’ psilocybin and scoured the globe for vintage samples of Hofmann’s version. Their research claims that Compass’ molecule—and the method for its production—is far from novel.
Compass executives, naturally, disagree. They maintain that their patents are in place to protect their legitimate intellectual property, enabling them to bring their treatments to the greatest number of patients possible. They also insist that they aren’t claiming some monopoly on psilocybin itself—only the process for producing a particular synthetic form.
In June, the Patent Trial and Appeal Board sided with Compass, ruling against Freedom to Operate’s challenge. Compass Pathways CEO George Goldsmith assures me his company is not trying to thwart anyone from gobbling a mind-expanding mushroom cap.
Cofounder Wilde, likewise, swears that Compass isn’t cornering the market on hugs. Both Goldsmith and Wilde exhibit the corporate tendency to stay frustratingly on message. Ask them what they had for breakfast and they’ll tell you how excited they are to build a new future for mental health. But pressed about his company’s image, and the efforts mobilized against it, Goldsmith’s consummate professionalism slips, if only a bit.
After all, it’s business as usual. The so-called “Hippie Mafia” of the ’60s and ’70s—led by superstar LSD chemists Tim Scully and Nicholas Sand—were bankrolled by the freaky scions of the Mellon robber baron dynasty. Wallach’s hero, Shulgin? He paid for his far-out chemical experiments with his day job developing insecticides and other chemicals at Dow, all while the company was mass-producing napalm for the Vietnam War.
“But I have no reservations.” For Wallach, corporate involvement seems preferable to the alternative, in which all decisions around the research, scheduling, and distribution of drugs fall to the government. His voice shifts a bit when he says the government, as if the term were suspended in spooky air quotes. He reserves no fondness for the DEA, which continues to impose severe penalties for the possession and manufacture of mind-expanding drugs, psychedelic renaissance notwithstanding.
But his antipathy stems from more than the tangles of bureaucratic red tape he has to wade through to do his work. He counts at least 10 close friends who have overdosed on synthetic opioids. He keeps photos of some of them in his home office. (The government of his native Pennsylvania has identified opioid overdoses as the state’s worst public health crisis.) Wallach has seen students struggle and suffer.
He rails at a system that still views drug use and addiction as moral issues, punishable to the full extent of the law, and not medical ones to be addressed, compassionately, through science—recent literature suggests that psychedelic therapies may help treat substance use disorders. “It definitely drives me,” he says, holding back tears. “I want to prevent that loss for other people. And improve people’s existence. We could have a paradise on this rock of ours floating through space.”
This hype, and the worry of falling into what Wallach calls “the trap of being a celebrity scientist,” doesn’t follow him back to the lab. He has plenty to take care of, as Big Neuropharma’s patent land grab ramps up and data piles high on his desk. Sitting in his office in West Philly, he shows me a graph on his computer.
It’s recent head-twitch data, charting how mice responded to various doses of a new drug, the chemical composition of which he cannot legally disclose. The curve slopes gently upward before accelerating steeply, peaking, and driving back down, like the arc of a roller coaster. The line tops out at a dose of 10 mg/kg, or “mig per kig,” as chemists pronounce it.
I ask Wallach if that’s any good. His eyes widen a bit, like he’s practically dying to tell me something. “It’s a good response,” he says. He plucks a sandy-brown glomp of nicotine gum from between his back molars, nests it back in its blister pack, and nods as he trails off
Maybe, someday soon, that new drug, whatever it is, will be given to human subjects in a Compass-sponsored clinical trial. It may upend pharmacology. Or psychology. It could spark the next revolution in psychedelia. And Wallach can toast his success, with a cigar and a single glass of scotch, as he earns his place among the psychopharmacological saints.
Until then, it’s charts and graphs and fastidious inventories of structure-activity relationships on reams of graph paper; it’s inspirational quotes stuck on fridges full of heady chemical analogs, and funky smells, and the head-twitching tempos of tripped-out mice.
They found him living in a shaded brick house on Rua Tiradentes, a wide avenue with trees down the center and barefoot boys dribbling soccer balls along the hot pavement. They found him alone, as best they could tell, though a maid came and went at odd hours during the eight days they hid and watched.
They found him living a comfortable life but certainly not one of luxury. The house was modest and could've been owned by any local merchant. The car was a 1983 Volkswagen Beetle, manufactured in Sao Paulo with a million others. It was red and clean, polished to a shine. Their first photo of him was snapped as he waxed it just inside the gate to his short driveway.
They found him much thinner, down considerably from the two hundred and thirty pounds he'd been carrying when last seen. His hair and skin were darker, his chin had been squared, and his nose had been slightly pointed. Subtle changes to the face. They'd paid a steep bribe to the surgeon in Rio who'd performed the alterations two and a half years earlier.
They found him after four years of tedious but diligent searching, four years of dead ends and lost trails and false tips, four years of pouring good money down the drain, good money chasing bad, it seemed.
But they found him. And they waited. There was at first the desire to snatch him immediately, to drug him and smuggle him to a safe house in Paraguay, to seize him before he saw them or before a neighbor became suspicious.
The initial excitement of the finding made them consider a quick strike, but after two days they settled down and waited. They loitered at various points along Rua Tiradentes, dressed like the locals, drinking tea in the shade, avoiding the sun, eating ice cream, talking to the children, watching his house.
They tracked him as he drove downtown to shop, and they photographed him from across the street as he left the pharmacy. They eased very near him in a fruit market and listened as he spoke to the clerk. Excellent Portuguese, with the very slight accent of an American or a German who'd studied hard.
He moved quickly downtown, gathering his goods and returning home, where he locked the gate behind him. His brief shopping trip yielded a dozen fine photos.
He had jogged in a prior life, though in the months before he disappeared his mileage shrunk as his weight ballooned. Now that he teetered on the brink of emaciation, they were not surprised to see him running again.
He left his house, locking the gate behind him, and began a slow trot down the sidewalk along Rua Tiradentes. Nine minutes for the first mile, as the street went perfectly straight and the houses grew farther apart. The pavement turned to gravel on the edge of town, and halfway into the second mile his pace was down to eight minutes a mile and Danilo had himself a nice sweat.
It was midday in October, the temperature near eighty, and he gained speed as he left town, past a small clinic packed with young mothers, past a small church the Baptists had built. The roads became dustier as he headed for the countryside at seven minutes a mile.
The running was serious business, and it pleased them mightily. Danilo would simply run into their arms. It was an equal mix of Americans and Brazilians, with Osmar giving the orders in Portuguese and Guy barking in English. Osmar could handle both languages, and had become the official interpreter for the team.
Guy was from Washington, an ex-government type who'd been hired to find Danny Boy, as he'd been nicknamed. Guy was considered a genius at some levels and immensely talented at others, and his past was a black hole. He was well into his fifth one-year contract to find Danny Boy, and there was a nice bonus for snagging the prey. Though he hid it well, Guy had been slowly cracking under the pressure of not finding Danny Boy.
Osmar and his band of Brazilians had not the slightest hint of Danny Boy's sins, but a fool could see that he'd disappeared and taken a trainload of money. And, although he was very curious about Danny Boy, Osmar had learned quickly not to ask questions. Guy and the Americans had nothing to say on the subject.
The pictures of Danny Boy were enlarged to eight by tens, and tacked along a wall in the kitchen of the dirty little cottage where they were studied by grim men with hard eyes, men who chain-smoked strong cigarettes and shook their heads at the photos.
They whispered among themselves and compared the new photos to the old ones, the ones from his previous life. Smaller man, odd chin, different nose. His hair was shorter and his skin darker. Was it really him?
They had been through this before, in Recife, on the northeastern coast, nineteen months earlier when they'd rented an apartment and looked at photos on the wall until the decision was made to grab the American and check his fingerprints. Wrong prints. Wrong American. They pumped some more drugs in him and left him in a ditch. Osmar wanted to grab him. Guy said they'd wait. He vanished on the fourth day, and the dirty little cottage was in chaos for thirty-six hours.
They were afraid to dig too deeply into the current life of Danilo Silva. If he was in fact their man, then he had plenty of money. And cash always worked wonders with the local authorities. For decades, cash had bought protection for Nazis and other Germans who'd smuggled themselves into Ponta Pora.
They saw him leave home in the red Beetle. He was in a hurry, came the report. He raced across town to the airport, jumped on a small commuter at the last moment, and was gone. His car was parked in the only lot, and they watched it every second of every hour. The plane was headed in the general direction of Sao Paulo, with four stops in between.
There was instantly a plan to enter his home and catalog everything. There had to be records. The money had to be tended to. Guy dreamed of finding bank statements, wire transfer reports, account summaries; all sorts of documents arranged in a neat portfolio which would lead him directly to the money.
But he knew better. If Danny Boy ran because of them, then he would never leave behind the evidence. And if he was in fact their man, then his home would be carefully secured. Danny Boy, wherever he was, would probably know the instant they opened his door or window.
They waited. They cursed and argued and strained even more under the pressure. Guy made his daily call to Washington, a nasty one. They watched the red Beetle. Each arrival brought out the binoculars and cell phones. Six flights the first day. Five the second. The dirty little cottage grew hot and the men settled outdoors-the Americans napping under a scrawny shade tree in the backyard and the Brazilians playing cards along the fence in the front.
Guy and Osmar took a long drive and vowed to grab him if he ever returned. Osmar was confident he would be back. Probably just out of town on business, whatever his business was. They'd snatch him, identify him, and if he happened to be the wrong man they'd simply throw him in a ditch and run. It had happened before.
He returned on the fifth day. They trailed him back to Rua Tiradentes, and everybody was happy. ON THE EIGHTH DAY, the dirty cottage emptied as all the Brazilians and all the Americans took their positions.
The course was a six-miler. He had covered it each day he'd been home, leaving at almost the same time, wearing the same blue and orange runner's shorts, well-worn Nikes, ankle socks, no shirt.
The perfect spot was two and a half miles from his house, over a small hill on a gravel road, not far from his turning-around point. Danilo topped the hill twenty minutes into his run, a few seconds ahead of schedule. He ran harder, for some reason. Probably the clouds.
A small car with a flat tire was just over the hill, blocking the road, trunk opened, its rear jacked up. Its driver was a burly young man who pretended to be startled at the sight of the skinny racer sweating and panting as he topped the hill. Danilo slowed for a second. There was more room to the right.
The driver suddenly pulled a large shiny pistol from the trunk and shoved it into Danilo's face. He froze, his eyes locked onto the gun, his mouth open with heavy breathing. The driver had thick hands and long, stout arms. He grabbed Danilo by the neck and yanked him roughly toward the car, then down to the bumper. He stuck the pistol in a pocket and with both hands folded Danilo into the trunk.
The driver slammed the trunk shut, lowered the car, tossed the jack into the ditch, and drove off. A mile away, he turned onto a narrow dirt path where his pals were anxiously waiting.
They tied nylon ropes around Danny Boy's wrists and a black cloth over his eyes, then shoved him into the back of a van. Osmar sat to his right, another Brazilian to his left. Someone removed his keys from the Velcro runner's pouch stuck to his waist. Danilo said nothing as the van started and began moving. He was still sweating and breathing even harder.
When the van stopped on a dusty road near a farm field, Danilo uttered his first words. "What do you want?" he asked, in Portuguese. Danny Boy struggled and kicked, but was no match.
"Don't speak," came the reply from Osmar, in English. The Brazilian to Danilo's left removed a syringe from a small metal box and deftly filled it with a potent liquid. Osmar pulled Danilo's wrists tightly toward him while the other man jabbed the needle into his upper arm. He stiffened and jerked, then realized it was hopeless. He actually relaxed as the last of the drug entered his body.
His breathing slowed; his head began to wobble. When his chin hit his chest, Osmar gently, with his right index finger, raised the shorts on Danilo's right leg, and found exactly what he expected to find. Pale skin. The running kept him thin, and it also kept him brown.
Kidnappings were all too common in the Frontier. Americans were easy targets. But why him? Danilo asked himself this as his head wobbled and his eyes closed. He smiled as he fell through space, dodging comets and meteors, grabbing at moons and grinning through entire galaxies.
THEY STUFFED HIM under some cardboard boxes filled with melons and berries. The border guards nodded without leaving their chairs, and Danny Boy was now in Paraguay, though he couldn't have cared less at the moment. He bounced happily along on the floor of the van as the roads grew worse and the terrain steeper. Osmar chain-smoked and occasionally pointed this way and that.
An hour after they grabbed him, they found the last turn. The cabin was in a crevice between two pointed hills, barely visible from the narrow dirt road. They carried him like a sack of meal and poured him onto a table in the den where Guy and the fingerprint man went to work.
Danny Boy snored heavily as prints were made of all eight fingers and both thumbs. The Americans and the Brazilians crowded around, watching every move. There was unopened whiskey in a box by the door, just in case this was the real Danny Boy.
The print man left abruptly and went to a room in the back where he locked the door and spread the fresh prints before him. He adjusted his lighting. He removed the master set, those freely given by Danny Boy when he was much younger, back when he was Patrick and seeking admission to the State Bar of Louisiana. Odd, this fingerprinting of lawyers.
Both sets were in fine shape, and it was immediately obvious they were a perfect match. But he meticulously checked all ten. There was no hurry. Let them wait out there. He rather enjoyed the moment. He finally opened the door and frowned hard at the dozen faces searching his. Then he smiled. "It's him," he said, in English, and they actually clapped.
Guy approved the whiskey, but only in moderation. There was more work to do. Danny Boy, still comatose, was given another shot and carried to a small bedroom with no window and a heavy door which locked from the outside. It was here that he would be interrogated, and tortured, if necessary.
THE BAREFOOT BOYS playing soccer in the street were too involved in their game to look up. Danny Boy's key ring had only four keys on it, and so the small front gate was unlocked quickly, and left open. An accomplice in a rented car came to a stop near a large tree four houses down. Another, on a motorbike, parked himself at the other end of the street and began tinkering with his brakes.
If a security system started howling upon entry, the intruder would simply run and never be seen again. If not, then he would lock himself in and take inventory. The door opened without sirens. The security panel on the wall informed whoever might be looking that the system was disarmed.
He breathed lightly and stood perfectly still for a full minute, then began to move around. He removed the hard drive from Danny Boy's PC, and collected all the disks. He rummaged through files on his desk, but found nothing but routine bills, some paid, others waiting. The fax was cheap and featureless, and declared itself to be out of order. He took photos of clothing, food, furniture, bookshelves, magazine racks.
Five minutes after the door opened, a silent signal was activated in Danilo's attic and a phone call was placed to a private security firm eleven blocks away, in downtown Ponta Pora. The call went unanswered because the security consultant on duty was swaying gently in a hammock out back.
A recorded message from Danilo's house informed whoever was supposed to be listening that there was a break-in. Fifteen minutes passed before human ears heard the message. By the time the consultant raced to Danilo's house, the intruder was gone. So was Mr. Silva. Everything appeared to be in order, including the Beetle under the carport. The house and gate were locked.
The directions in the file were specific. On such alarms, do not call the police. Try first to locate Mr. Silva, and in the event he cannot be found at once, then call a number in Rio. Ask for Eva Miranda. WITH BARELY suppressed excitement, Guy made his daily call to Washington. He actually closed his eyes and smiled when he uttered the words, "It's him." His voice was an octave higher.
Guy found a perch on a stump behind the cabin. The vegetation was dense, the air thin and cool. The soft voices of happy men drifted up to him. The ordeal was over, for the most part. He had just earned an extra fifty thousand dollars. Finding the money would mean another bonus, and he was certain he'd find the money.
In a small neat office on the tenth floor of a high-rise, Eva Miranda squeezed the phone with both hands and slowly repeated the words she had just heard. The silent alarm had summoned the security guard. Mr. Silva wasn't at home, but his car was parked in the drive and the house was locked.
Someone had entered, tripped the alarm, and it couldn't be a false one because it was still activated when the security guard arrived. Danilo was missing. Maybe he'd gone jogging and neglected the routine. According to the guard's account, the silent alarm had been activated an hour and ten minutes ago.
But Danilo jogged for less than an hour-six miles at seven to eight minutes per, total of fifty minutes max. No exceptions. She knew his movements. &#8226;She called his home on Rua Tiradentes, and no one answered. She called the number to a cell phone he sometimes kept nearby, and no one answered.
The rules of the New Haven Youth League required that each kid play at least ten minutes in each game. Exceptions were allowed for players who had upset their coaches by skipping practice or violating other rules. In such cases, a coach could file a report before the game and inform the scorekeeper that so-and-so wouldn't play much, if at all, because of some infraction. This was frowned on by the league; it was, after all, much more recreational than competitive.
With four minutes left in the game, Coach Kyle looked down the bench, nodded at a somber and pouting little boy named Marquis, and said, "Do you want to play?" Without responding, Marquis walked to the scorers' table and waited for a whistle. His violations were numerous  -  skipping practice, skipping school, bad grades, losing his uniform, foul language.
In fact, after ten weeks and fifteen games, Marquis had broken every one of the few rules his coach tried to enforce. Coach Kyle had long since realized that any new rule would be immediately violated by his star, and for that reason he trimmed his list and fought the temptation to add new regulations. It wasn't working.
Trying to control ten inner-city kids with a soft touch had put the Red Knights in last place in the 12 and Under division of the winter league. Marquis was only eleven, but clearly the best player on the court.
He preferred shooting and scoring over passing and defending, and within two minutes he'd slashed through the lane, around and through and over much larger players, and scored six points. His average was fourteen, and if allowed to play more than half a game, he could probably score thirty. In his own young opinion, he really didn't need to practice.
In spite of the one-man show, the game was out of reach. Kyle McAvoy sat quietly on the bench, watching the game and waiting for the clock to wind down. One game to go and the season would be over, his last as a basketball coach. In two years he'd won a dozen, lost two dozen, and asked himself how any person in his right mind would willingly coach at any level.
He was doing it for the kids, he'd said to himself a thousand times, kids with no fathers, kids from bad homes, kids in need of a positive male influence. And he still believed it, but after two years of babysitting, and arguing with parents when they bothered to show up, and hassling with other coaches who were not above cheating, and trying to ignore teenage referees who didn't know a block from a charge, he was fed up. He'd done his community service, in this town anyway.
He watched the game and waited, yelling occasionally because that's what coaches are supposed to do. He looked around the empty gym, an old brick building in downtown New Haven, home to the youth league for fifty years. A handful of parents were scattered through the bleachers, all waiting for the final horn. Marquis scored again. No one applauded. The Red Knights were down by twelve with two minutes to go.
At the far end of the court, just under the ancient scoreboard, a man in a dark suit walked through the door and leaned against the retractable bleachers. He was noticeable because he was white. There were no white players on either team. He stood out because he wore a suit that was either black or navy, with a white shirt and a burgundy tie, all under a trench coat that announced the presence of an agent or a cop of some variety.
Coach Kyle happened to see the man when he entered the gym, and he thought to himself that the guy was out of place. Probably a detective of some sort, maybe a narc looking for a dealer. It would not be the first arrest in or around the gym.
After the agent/cop leaned against the bleachers, he cast a long suspicious look at the Red Knights' bench, and his eyes seemed to settle on Coach Kyle, who returned the stare for a second before it became uncomfortable. Marquis let one fly from near mid-court, air ball, and Coach Kyle jumped to his feet, spread his hands wide, shook his head as if to ask, "Why?"
Marquis ignored him as he loafed back on defense. A dumb foul stopped the clock and prolonged the misery. While looking at the free-throw shooter, Kyle glanced beyond him, and in the background was the agent/cop, still staring, not at the action but at the coach.
For a twenty-five-year-old law student with no criminal record and no illegal habits or proclivities, the presence and the attention of a man who gave all indications of being employed by some branch of law enforcement should have caused no concern whatsoever.
But it never worked that way with Kyle McAvoy. Street cops and state troopers didn't particularly bother him. They were paid to simply react. But the guys in dark suits, the investigators and agents, the ones trained to dig deep and discover secrets  -  those types still unnerved him.
Thirty seconds to go and Marquis was arguing with a referee. He'd thrown an F-bomb at a ref two weeks earlier and was suspended for a game. Coach Kyle yelled at his star, who never listened. He quickly scanned the gym to see if agent/cop No. 1 was alone or was now accompanied by agent/cop No. 2. No, he was not.
Another dumb foul, and Kyle yelled at the referee to just let it slide. He sat down and ran his finger over the side of his neck, then flicked off the perspiration. It was early February, and the gym was, as always, quite chilly.
Why was he sweating? The agent/cop hadn't moved an inch; in fact he seemed to enjoy staring at Kyle. The decrepit old horn finally squawked. The game was mercifully over. One team cheered, and one team really didn't care. Both lined up for the obligatory high fives and "Good game, good game," as meaningless to twelve-year-olds as it is to college players.
As Kyle congratulated the opposing coach, he glanced down the court. The white man was gone.What were the odds he was waiting outside? Of course it was paranoia, but paranoia had settled into Kyle's life so long ago that he now simply acknowledged it, coped with it, and moved on.
The Red Knights regrouped in the visitors' locker room, a cramped little space under the sagging and permanent stands on the home side. There Coach Kyle said all the right things  -  nice effort, good hustle, our game is improving in certain areas, let's finish on a high note this Saturday.
The boys were changing clothes and hardly listening. They were tired of basketball because they were tired of losing, and of course all blame was heaped upon the coach. He was too young, too white, too much of an Ivy Leaguer.
The few parents who were there waited outside the locker room, and it was those tense moments when the team came out that Kyle hated most about his community service. There would be the usual complaints about playing time. Marquis had an uncle, a twenty-two-year-old former all-state player with a big mouth and a fondness for bitching about Coach Kyle's unfair treatment of the "best player in the league."
From the locker room, there was another door that led to a dark, narrow hallway that ran behind the home stands and finally gave way to an outside door that opened into an alley. Kyle was not the first coach to discover this escape route, and on this night he wanted to avoid not only the families and their complaints but also the agent/cop.
He said a quick goodbye to his boys, and as they fled the locker room, he made his escape. In a matter of seconds he was outside, in the alley, then walking quickly along a frozen sidewalk. Heavy snow had been plowed, and the sidewalk was icy and barely passable.
The temperature was somewhere far below freezing. It was 8:30 on a Wednesday, and he was headed for the law journal offices at the Yale Law School, where he would work until midnight at least. He didn't make it.
The agent was leaning against the fender of a red Jeep Cherokee that was parked parallel on the street. The vehicle was titled to one John McAvoy of York, Pennsylvania, but for the past six years it had been the reliable companion of his son, Kyle, the true owner.
Though he'd served in Congress for fourteen years, Aaron Lake still drove his own car around Washington. He didn't need or want a chauffeur, or an aide, or a bodyguard. Sometimes an intern would ride with him and take notes, but for the most part Lake enjoyed the tranquillity of sitting in D.C. traffic while listening to classical guitar on the stereo. Many of his friends, especially those who'd achieved the status of a Mr. Chairman or a Mr.Vice Chairman, had larger cars with drivers. Some even had limos.
Not Lake. It was a waste of time and money and privacy. If he ever sought higher office, he certainly didn't want the baggage of a chauffeur wrapped around his neck. Besides, he enjoyed being alone. His office was a madhouse. He had fifteen people bouncing off the walls, answering phones, opening files, serving the folks back in Arizona who'd sent him to Washington. Two more did nothing but raise money. Three interns managed to further clog his narrow corridors and take up more time than they deserved.
He was single, a widower, with a quaint little town-house in Georgetown that he was very fond of. He lived quietly, occasionally stepping into the social scene that had attracted him and his late wife in the early years.
He followed the Beltway, the traffic slow and cautious because of a light snow. He was quickly cleared through CIA security at Langley, and was very pleased to see a preferred parking space waiting for him, along with two plainclothes security personnel.
"Mr. Maynard is waiting;" one of them said gravely, opening his car door while the other took his briefcase. Power did have its perks. Lake had never met with the CIA director at Langley. They'd conferred twice on the Hill, years earlier, back when the poor guy could get around.
Teddy Maynard was in a wheelchair and in constant pain, and even senators got themselves driven out to Langley anytime he needed them. He'd called Lake a halfdozen times in fourteen years, but Maynard was a busy man. His light-lifting was usually handled by associates.
Security barriers collapsed all around the congressman as he and his escorts worked their way into the depths of the CIA headquarters. By the time Lake arrived at Mr. Maynard's suite, he was walking a bit taller, with just a trace of a swagger. He couldn't help it. Power was intoxicating.
Inside the room, a large, square, windowless place known unofficially as the bunker, the Director was sitting alone, looking blankly at a large screen upon which the face of Congressman Aaron Lake was frozen. It was a recent photo, one taken at a black-tie fund-raiser three months earlier where Lake had half a glass of wine, ate baked chicken, no dessert, drove himself home, alone, and went to bed before eleven.
The photo was appealing because Lake was so attractive-light red hair with almost no gray, hair that was not colored or tinted, a full hairline, dark blue eyes, square chin, really nice teeth. He was fifty-three years old and aging superbly. He did thirty minutes a day on a rowing machine and his cholesterol was 160. They hadn't found a single bad habit.
He enjoyed the company of women, especially when it was important to be seen with one. His steady squeeze was a sixty-yearold widow in Bethesda whose late husband had made a fortune as a lobbyist.
Both his parents were dead. His only child was a schoolteacher in Santa Fe. His wife of twenty-nine years had died in 1996 of ovarian cancer. A year later, his thirteen-year-old spaniel died too, and Congressman Aaron Lake of Arizona truly lived alone. He was Catholic, not that that mattered anymore, and he attended Mass at least once a week. Teddy pushed the button and the face disappeared.
Lake was unknown outside the Beltway, primarily because he'd kept his ego in check. If he had aspirations to higher office, they were closely guarded. His name had been mentioned once as a potential candidate for governor of Arizona, but he enjoyed Washington too much.
He loved Georgetown-the crowds, the anonymity, the city life-good restaurants and cramped bookstores and espresso bars. He liked theater and music, and he and his late wife had never missed an event at the Kennedy Center.
On the Hill, Lake was known as a bright and hardworking congressman who was articulate, fiercely honest, and loyal, conscientious to a fault. Because his district was the home of four large defense contractors, he had become an expert on military hardware and readiness. He was Chairman of the House Committee on Armed Services.
Teddy pushed the button again, and there was Lake's face. For a fifty-year veteran of intelligence wars, Teddy seldom had a knot in his stomach. He'd dodged bullets, hidden under bridges, frozen in mountains, poisoned two Czech spies, shot a traitor in Bonn, learned seven languages, fought the cold war, tried to prevent the next one, had more adventures than any ten agents combined, yet looking at the innocent face of Congressman Aaron Lake he felt a knot.
They'd started with a hundred senators, fifty governors, four hundred and thirty-five congressmen, all the likely suspects, and now there was only one. Representative Aaron Lake of Arizona.
Teddy flicked a button and the wall went blank. His legs were covered with a quilt. He wore the same thing every day-a V-necked navy sweater, white shirt, subdued bow tie. He rolled his wheelchair to a spot near the door, and prepared to meet his candidate.
During the eight minutes Lake was kept waiting, he was served coffee and offered a pastry, which he declined. He was six feet tall, weighed oneseventy, was fastidious about his appearance, and had he taken the pastry Teddy would've been surprised. As far as they could tell, Lake never ate sugar. Never.
His coffee was strong, though, and as he sipped it he reviewed a little research of his own. The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the alarming flow of black market artillery into the Balkans. Lake had two memos, eighty pages of double-spaced data he'd crunched until two in the morning. He wasn't sure why Mr. Maynard wanted him to appear at Langley to discuss such a matter, but he was determined to be prepared.
A soft buzzer sounded, the door opened, and the Director of the CIA rolled out, wrapped in a quilt and looking every day of his seventy-four years. His handshake was firm, though, probably because of the strain of pushing himself around. Lake followed him back into the room, leaving the two college-educated pit bulls to guard the door.
They sat opposite each other, across a very long table that ran to the end of the room where a large white wall served as a screen. After brief preliminaries, Teddy pushed a button and another face appeared. Another button, and the lights grew dim. Lake loved it push little buttons, high-tech images flash instantly. No doubt the room was wired with enough electronic junk to monitor his pulse from thirty feet.
A flick, another face, this one of stone under a gaudy military parade hat. "This isYuri Goltsin, second in command of what's left of the Russian army. Chenkov and Goltsin have big plans." Another flick, a map of a section of Russia north of Moscow. "They're stockpiling arms in this region," Teddy said. "They're actually stealing them from themselves, looting the Russian army, but, and more important, they're buying them on the black market"
"Everywhere. They're swapping oil for Israeli radar. They're trafficking in drugs and buying Chinese tanks through Pakistan. Chenkov has close ties with some mobsters, one of whom recently bought a factory in Malaysia where they make nothing but assault rifles. It's very elaborate. Chenkov has a brain, a very high IQ. He's probably a genius."
Teddy Maynard was a genius, and if he bestowed that title on another, then Congressman Lake certainly believed it. "So who gets attacked?" Teddy dismissed the question because he wasn't ready to answer it. "See the town of Vologda? It's about five hundred miles east of Moscow. Last week we tracked sixty Vetrov to a warehouse there. As you know, the Vetrov-"
Teddy squeezed a button and the wall was blank. But the lights stayed dim, so that when he spoke across the table he did so almost firm the shadows. "The coup is right around the corner, Mr. Lake. Our worst fears are coming true. Every aspect of Russian society and culture is cracking and crumbling. Democracy is a joke.
Capitalism is a nightmare. We thought we could McDonaldize the damned place, and it's been a disaster. Workers are not getting paid, and they're the lucky ones because they have jobs. Twenty percent do not. Children are dying because there are no medicines. So are many adults. Ten percent of the population are homeless. Twenty percent are hungry.
Each day things get worse. The country has been looted by the mobsters. We think at least five hundred billion dollars has been stolen and taken out of the country. There's no relief in sight. The time is perfect for a new strongman, a new dictator who'll promise to lead the people back to stability. The country is crying for leadership, and Mr. Chenkov has decided it's up to him."
"He has the army, and that's all it takes. The coup will be bloodless because the people are ready for it. They'll embrace Chenkov. He'll lead the parade into Red Square and dare us, the United States, to stand in his way We'll be the bad guys again."
"There'll be nothing cold about it. Chenkov wants to expand, to recapture the old Soviet Union. He desperately needs cash, so he'll simply take it in the form of land, factories, oil, crops. He'll start little regional wars, which he'll easily win." Another map appeared.
Phase One of the new world order was presented to Lake. Teddy didn't miss a word. "I suspect he'll roll through the Baltic States, toppling governments in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, etc. Then he'll go to the old Eastern bloc and strike a deal with some of the Communists there:" The congressman was speechless as he watched Russia expand. Teddy's predictions were so certain, so precise.
"Yep. Happens every time. Poland is now a member of NATO, for some damned reason. Imagine that. Poland signing on to help protect us and Europe. Chenkov solidifies Russia's old turf, and casts a longing eye westward. Same as Hider, except he was looking to the east."
"Why did Hitler want Poland? It was between him and Russia. He hated the Poles, and he was ready to start a war. Chenkov doesn't give a damn about Poland, he just wants to control it. And he wants to destroy NATO."
The Stadio Lanfranchi is in the northwest corner of Parma, still in the city proper but away from the ancient buildings and narrow streets. It's a rugby pitch, home to two professional teams and leased to the Panthers for football. It has canopy-covered grandstands on both sides, a press box, and a playing surface of natural grass that is well maintained in spite of the heavy traffic.
Soccer is played at the much larger Stadio Tardini, a mile away in the southeast section of the city, and there larger crowds gather to celebrate Italy's modern-day reason to exist. There's not much to cheer about, though. The lowly Parma team barely clings to its place in the prestigious Series A of Italian soccer. The team still draws its faithful, though--about thirty thousand long suffering fans show up with Cubs-like devotion year after year, game after game.
That's about twenty-nine thousand more than generally show up for Panthers games at Stadio Lanfranchi. It has seating for three thousand, but rarely sells out. Actually, there's nothing to sell. Admission is free.
Rick Dockery walked slowly across midfield as long shadows fell, hands crammed in jeans pockets, the aimless stroll of a man in another world. Occasionally, he stopped and pressed hard with a loafer to check the turf. He had not stepped onto a field, or a pitch or whatever the hell it was, since that last day in Cleveland.
Sam sat five rows up on the home side, watching his quarterback and wondering what he was thinking. Rick was thinking about a training camp one summer not too long ago, a brief but brutal ordeal with one of the pro teams, he couldn't remember exactly which. Camp that summer had been at a small college with a field similar to the one he was now inspecting.
A Division III school, a tiny college with the obligatory rustic dorms and cafeteria and cramped locker rooms, the type of place some NFL teams choose to make training as tough and austere as possible. And he was thinking about high school. Back at Davenport South he had played every game in front of more people, home and away. He lost in the state finals his junior year in front of eleven thousand, small maybe by Texas standards but still a heckuva crowd for Iowa high school football.
At the moment, though, Davenport South was far away, as were many things that once seemed important. He stopped in the end zone and studied the goalposts, odd ones. Two tall posts, painted blue and yellow, anchored in the ground and wrapped with green padding that advertised Heineken. Rugby. He climbed the steps and sat next to his coach, who said, "Whatta you think?"
"Ten to be exact. The goalposts are 110 yards apart, but we need 20 for the two end zones. So we play on what's left, 90 yards. Most of the fields we play on are meant for rugby, so we have to make do." Rick grunted and smiled. "Whatever."
"It's a long way from Browns Stadium in Cleveland," Sam said. "Thank God for that. I never liked Cleveland, the city, the fans, the team, and I hated the stadium. Right there on Lake Erie, bitter winds, ground as hard as concrete."
"What was your favorite stop?" Rick grunted out a laugh and said, "Stop. That's a good word. I stopped here and there, but never found a place. Dallas, I guess. I prefer warmer weather." The sun was almost gone and the air was growing cooler. Rick stuck his hands into the pockets of his tight jeans and said, "So tell me about football in Italy. How did it happen?"
"The first teams popped up about twenty years ago and it spread like crazy, mainly here in the north. The Super Bowl in 1990 drew twenty thousand, a lot less last year. Then it declined for some reason; now it's growing again. There are nine teams in the A Division, twenty-five or so in the B Division, and flag football for the kids." Another pause as Rick rearranged his hands. The two months in Florida had given him a dark tan but a thin skin. His tan was already fading. "How many fans watch the Panthers?"
"What's so funny?" Sam asked. "Nothing. Where am I?" "It's normal. The shock wears off fast, though. Once you put on the gear and start hitting you'll feel at home." I don't hit, Rick wanted to say, but thought better of it. "So Bergamo is the team to beat?" "Oh yes. They've won eight straight Super Bowls and sixty one straight games."
"The Italian Super Bowl. Can't believe I missed it." "A lot of people missed it. On the sports pages we go last, after swimming and motorbiking. The Super Bowl is televised, though. On one of the lesser channels." Because he was still horrified at the thought of his friends learning that he was playing intramural ball in Italy, the prospect of no press and no televised games was quite appealing. Rick was not looking for glory in Parma, just a small paycheck while he and Arnie waited for a miracle back home.
He didn't want anyone to know where he was. "How often do we practice?" "We get the field Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, eight o'clock at night. These guys have real jobs." "What kinds of jobs?" "Everything. Airline pilot, engineer, several truck drivers, property agent, contractors, one guy owns a cheese shop, another runs a bar, a dentist, two or three work in gyms. Two stonemasons, a couple of auto mechanics."
Rick considered this for a while. His thoughts were slow, the shock was wearing off. "What type of offense?" "We keep things basic. Power I, lots of motion and misdirection. Our quarterback last year couldn't throw, so it really limited our attack."
"Your quarterback couldn't throw?" "Well, he could, but not very well." "We got a runner?" "Oh yes. Slidell Turner. Tough little black kid from Colorado State, drafted late by the Colts four years ago, got cut, just too small." "How small?" "Five eight, 180. Too small for the NFL, but perfect for the Panthers. They have trouble catching him here." "What the hell is a black kid from Colorado State doing here in Parma, Italy?"
"Sure, why not?" There was a clubhouse just beyond the north end zone, and as they walked toward it, a train roared by, a stone's throw away. Inside, the long flat building was adorned with dozens of posters advertising the corporate sponsors. Rugby occupied most of it, but the Panthers had a small room packed with lockers and equipment. "Whatta you think?" Sam asked. "It's a locker room," Rick said.
He tried not to make compar isons, but for a moment couldn't help but remember the lavish digs in tlie newer NFL stadiums. Carpet, wood-paneled lockers big enough for small cars, leather recliners built for linemen, private stalls in a shower room bigger than this. Oh well. He told himself he could endure anything for five months.
They made lengthy, even rambling introductions as the players took turns greeting Rick. Each little intro required at least two insults, often with Franco and Nino tag-teaming against their fellow Italian. Rick was embraced and gripped and fawned over until he was almost embarrassed.
He was surprised by the amount of English used. Every Panther was learning the language at some level. Sly and Trey were close by, laughing at him but also reuniting with their old teammates. Both had already vowed that this would be their last year in Italy. Few Americans returned for a third season.
Coach Russo called things to order and welcomed everyone back. His Italian was slow and thoughtful. The players were sprawled on the floor, on benches, in chairs, even in lockers. Though he kept trying not to, Rick couldn't help but flash back.
He remembered the locker room at Davenport South High School. It was at least four times larger than the one he was now in. "You understand this?" he whispered to Sly. "Sure," he said with a grin. "Then what's he saying?" "Says the team was unable to find a decent quarterback in the off-season so we're screwed again."
"Quiet!" Sam yelled at the Americans, and the Italians were amused. If you only knew, thought Rick. He'd once seen a semi famous NFL coach cut a rookie for chatting in a team meeting during camp. Cut him on the spot, almost made him cry.
Some of the most memorable tongue-lashings, dog- cussings, verbal bloodlettings Rick had seen in football had happened not in the heat of battle but in the seemingly safe confines of the locker room. "Mi displace" Sly said loudly, causing even more chuckles. Sam continued. "What was that?" Rick whispered. "Means I'm sorry," Sly hissed with his jaws clenched. "Now will you shut up."
Rick had mentioned to Sam earlier that he needed just a few words with the team. When Sam finished his welcoming remarks, he introduced Rick and handled the translation. Rick stood, nodded to his new teammates, and said, "I'm very happy to be here, and looking forward to the season." Sam threw up a hand--halt-- translation. The Italians smiled. "I'd like to clear up one thing." Halt, more Italian.
"I've played in the NFL, but not very much, and I have never played in the Super Bowl." Sam frowned and rendered. He would explain later that the Italians take a dim view of modesty and self deprecation. "In fact, I've never started a game as a professional." Another frown, slower Italian, and Rick wondered if Sam wasn't doctoring his little speech.
There were no smiles among the Italians. Rick looked at Nino and continued, "Just wanted to clear that up. It is my goal to win my first Super Bowl here in Italy." Sam's voice grew much stronger, and when he finished, the room erupted into applause. Rick sat down and got a bruising bear hug from Franco, who had slightly outmaneuvered Nino as the bodyguard.
Sam outlined the practice plan, and the speeches were over. With a rousing cheer, they husded from the locker room and over to the practice field, where they fanned out into a somewhat organized pattern and began stretching. At this point, a thick-necked gentleman with a shaved head and bulging biceps took over. He was Alex Olivetto, a former player, now an assistant coach, and a real Italian.
He strutted up and down the lines of players barking orders like an angry field marshal, and there was no back talk. "He's psycho," Sly said when Alex was far away. Rick was at the end of a line, next to Sly and behind Trey, copying the stretches and exercises of his teammates.
Alex went from the basics--jumping jacks, push- ups, sit-ups, lunges--to a grueling session of running in place with an occasional drop to the ground, then back up. After fifteen minutes, Rick was heaving and trying to forget last night's dinner. He glanced to his left and noticed that Nino had worked up a good sweat.
After thirty minutes, Rick was sorely tempted to pull Sam aside and explain a few things. He was the quarterback, you know, and quarterbacks, at the professional level, are not subjected to the same drills and boot camp banalities required of the regular players.
But Sam was far away, at the other end of the field. Then Rick realized he was being watched. As the warm-up dragged on, he caught more glances from his teammates, just checking to see if a real pro quarterback could grind it out with them. Was he a member of the team, or a prima donna just passing through? Rick kicked it up a notch to impress them.
Usually, wind sprints were put off until the end of practice, but not so with Alex. After forty-five minutes of bruising exercises, the team members gathered at the goal line, and in groups of six sprinted forty yards downfield, where Alex was waiting with a very active whistle and a nasty insult for whoever brought up the rear.
Rick ran with the backs. Sly easily raced away, and Franco easily thundered in last. Rick was in the middle, and as he sprinted, he remembered the glory days at Davenport South when he ran wild and scored almost as many touchdowns with his feet as with his arm. The running slowed considerably in college; he was simply not a running quarterback.
Running was almost prohibited in the pros; it was an excellent way to get a leg broken. The Italians chattered at each other, offering encouragement as the sprints dragged on. After five they were breathing heavily and Alex was just warming up.
"I wish I could." After ten forties, Rick was asking himself what, exactly, he had been expecting in Parma. His hamstrings were on fire, his calves ached, he was straining and gasping and soaked with sweat, though the temperature was hardly warm. He'd have a talk with Sam and get some things straight. This wasn't high school ball.
He was a pro! Nino bolted for the sideline, ripped off his helmet, and delivered. The team yelled its encouragement, and Alex gave three quick bursts on the whistle. After a water break, Sam stepped forward with instructions. He would take the backs and receivers. Nino had the offensive linemen. Alex had the linebackers and defensive linemen.
Trey was in charge of the secondary. They scattered around the field. "This is Fabrizio," Sam said, introducing the rather slim receiver to Rick. "Our wideout, great hands." They acknowledged each other. High-maintenance, high-strung, God's gift to Italian football.
Sam had briefed Rick on Fabrizio and suggested that he take it easy on the kid for the first couple of days. There had been no small number of receivers in the NFL who'd had trouble with Rick's bullets, at least in practice. In games, the bullets, though beautiful, had too often sailed high and wide. A few had been caught by fans five rows up.
The backup quarterback was a twenty-year-old Italian named Alberto something or other. Rick threw soft sideline routes to one group, Alberto to the other. According to Sam, Alberto preferred to run the ball because he had a rather weak arm. Weak it was, Rick noticed after a couple of passes. He threw like a shot putter, and his passes fluttered through the air like wounded birds. "Was he the backup last year?" Rick asked when Sam got close enough.
"Yes, but didn't play much." Fabrizio was a natural athlete, quick and graceful with soft hands. He worked hard to appear nonchalant, as if anything Rick fired to him was just another easy catch. He big- leagued a few catches, snared them with too much cocky indifference, then committed a sin that would have cost him dearly in the NFL.
On a lackadaisical quick-out, he snatched the ball with one hand simply to show off. The pass was on target and did not need a one-arm grab. Rick simmered, but Sam was all over it. "Let it go," he said. "He doesn't know any better." Rick's arm was still slightly sore, and though he was in no hurry to impress anyone, he was tempted to gun one into Fabrizio's chest and watch him drop like a rock. Relax, he said to himself, he's just a kid having fun.
Then Sam barked at Fabrizio for running sloppy patterns, and the kid sulked like a baby. More patterns, longer throws, then Sam brought the offense together for a review of the basics. Nino squatted over the ball, and to prevent jammed fingers, Rick suggested they practice a few snaps, slowly.
Nino agreed that this was an excellent idea, but when Rick's hands touched his backside, he flinched. Not a radical jerk of the rear, nothing that would cause a referee to flag him for illegal procedure or offside, but a distinguishable tightening of the gluteus maximus much like a schoolkid about to receive licks from a thick wooden paddle.
Perhaps it was just a case of new-quarterback jitters, Rick told himself. For the next snap, Nino hovered over the ball, Rick bent slightly forward, eased his hands just under the center's rump, as he had done since junior high school, and upon contact Nino's glutes instinctively tightened again.
The road to Rake Field ran beside the school, past the old band hall and the tennis courts, through a tunnel of two perfect rows of red and yellow maples planted and paid for by the boosters, then over a small hill to a lower area covered with enough asphalt for a thousand cars. The road stopped in front of an immense gate of brick and wrought iron that announced the presence of Rake Field, and beyond the gate was a chain-link fence that encircled the hallowed ground.
On Friday nights, the entire town of Messina waited for the gate to open, then rushed to the bleachers where seats were claimed and nervous pregame rituals were followed. The black, paved pasture around Rake Field would overflow long before the opening kickoff, sending the out-of-town traffic into the dirt roads and alleys and remote parking zones behind the school's cafeteria and its baseball field. Opposing fans had a rough time in Messina, but not nearly as rough as the opposing teams.
Driving slowly along the road to Rake Field was Neely Crenshaw, slowly because he had not been back in many years, slowly because when he saw the lights of the field the memories came roaring back, as he knew they would. He rolled through the red and yellow maples, bright in their autumn foliage. Their trunks had been a foot thick in Neely's glory days, and now their branches touched above him and their leaves dropped like snow and covered the road to Rake Field.
It was late in the afternoon, in October, and a soft wind from the north chilled the air. He stopped his car near the gate and stared at the field. All movements were slow now, all thoughts weighted heavily with sounds and images of another life.
When he played the field had no name; none was needed. Every person in Messina knew it simply as The Field. "The boys are on The Field early this morning," they would say at the cafes downtown. "What time are we cleaning up The Field?" they would ask at the Rotary Club. "Rake says we need new visitors' bleachers at The Field," they would say at the boosters' meeting. "Rake's got 'em on The Field late tonight," they would say at the beer joints north of town.
No piece of ground in Messina was more revered than The Field. Not even the cemetery. After Rake left they named it after him. Neely was gone by then, of course, long gone with no plans to return. Why he was returning now wasn't completely clear, but deep in his soul he'd always known this day would come, the day somewhere out there in the future when he was called back.
He'd always known that Rake would eventually die, and of course there would be a funeral with hundreds of former players packed around the casket, all wearing their Spartan green, all mourning the loss of a legend they loved and hated. But he'd told himself many times that he would never return to The Field as long as Rake was alive.
In the distance, behind the visitors' stands, were the two practice fields, one with lights. No other school in the state had such a luxury, but then no other town worshiped its football as thoroughly and collectively as Messina. Neely could hear a coach's whistle and the thump and grunts of bodies hitting each other as the latest Spartan team got ready for Friday night. He walked through the gate and across the track, painted dark green of course.
The end zone grass was manicured and suitable for putting, but there were a few wild sprigs inching up the goalpost. And there was a patch or two of weeds in one corner, and now that he'd noticed Neely looked even closer and saw untrimmed growth along the edge of the track.
In the glory days dozens of volunteers gathered every Thursday afternoon and combed The Field with gardening shears, snipping out every wayward blade of grass. The glory days were gone. They left with Rake. Now Messina football was played by mortals, and the town had lost its swagger.
Coach Rake had once cursed loudly at a well-dressed gentleman who committed the sin of stepping onto the sacred Bermuda grass of The Field. The gentleman backtracked quickly, then walked around the sideline, and when he drew closer Rake realized he had just cursed the Mayor of Messina. The Mayor was offended.
Rake didn't care. No one walked on his field. The Mayor, unaccustomed to being cursed, set in motion an ill-fated effort to fire Rake, who shrugged it off. The locals defeated the Mayor four to one as soon as his name appeared on the next ballot. In those days, Eddie Rake had more political clout in Messina than all the politicians combined, and he thought nothing of it.
Neely stuck to the sideline and slowly made his way toward the home stands, then he stopped cold and took a deep breath as the pregame jitters hit him hard. The roar of a long-ago crowd came back, a crowd packed tightly together up there, in the bleachers, with the band in the center of things blaring away with its endless renditions of the Spartan fight song.
And on the sideline just a few feet away, he could see number 19 nervously warming up as the mob worshiped him. Number 19 was a high school ail-American, a highly recruited quarterback with a golden arm, fast feet, plenty of size, maybe the greatest Messina ever produced.
Number 19 was Neely Crenshaw in another life. He walked a few steps along the sideline, stopped at the fifty where Rake had coached hundreds of games, and looked again at the silent bleachers where ten thousand people once gathered on Friday nights to pour their emotions upon a high school football team.
The crowds were half that now, he'd heard. Fifteen years had passed since number 19 had thrilled so many. Fifteen years since Neely had played on the sacred turf. How many times had he promised himself he would never do what he was now doing? How many times had he sworn he would never come back?
On a practice field in the distance a coach blew a whistle and someone was yelling, but Neely barely heard it. Instead he was hearing the drum corps of the band, and the raspy, unforgettable voice of Mr. Bo Michael on the public address, and the deafening sound of the bleachers rattling as the fans jumped up and down.
And he heard Rake bark and growl, though his coach seldom lost his cool in the heat of battle. The cheerleaders were over there-bouncing, chanting, short skirts, tights, tanned and firm legs. Neely had his pick back then.
His parents sat on the forty, eight rows down from the press box. He waved at his mother before every kickoff. She spent most of the game in prayer, certain he would break his neck.
The college recruiters got passes to a row of chair-backed seats on the fifty, prime seating. Someone counted thirty-eight scouts for the Garnet Central game, all there to watch number 19. Over a hundred colleges wrote letters; his father still kept them. Thirty-one offered full scholarships. When Neely signed with Tech, there was a press conference and headlines.
Ten thousand seats up in the bleachers, for a town with a population of eight thousand. The math had never worked. But they piled in from the county, from out in the sticks where there was nothing else to do on Friday night.
They got their paychecks and bought their beer, and they came to town, to The Field where they clustered in one raucous pack at the north end of the stands and made more noise than the students, the band, and the townsfolk combined.
When he was a boy, his father had kept him away from the north end. "Those county people" down there were drinking and sometimes fighting and they yelled foul language at the officials. A few years later, number 19 adored the racket made by those county people, and they certainly adored him.
The bleachers were silent now, waiting. He moved slowly down the sideline, hands stuck deep in his pockets, a forgotten hero whose star had faded so quickly. The Messina quarterback for three seasons. Over a hundred touchdowns. He'd never lost on this field. The games came back to him, though he tried to block them out. Those days were gone, he told himself for the hundredth time. Long gone.
In the south end zone the boosters had erected a giant score-board, and mounted around it on large white placards with bold green lettering was the history of Messina football. And thus the history of the town. Undefeated seasons in 1960 and 1961, when Rake was not yet thirty years old.
Then in 1964 The Streak began, with perfect seasons for the rest of that decade and into the next. A month after Neely was born in 1970, Messina lost to South Wayne in the state championship, and The Streak was over. Eighty-four wins in a row, a national record at that time, and Eddie Rake was a legend at the age of thirty-nine.
Neely's father had told him of the unspeakable gloom that engulfed the town in the days after that loss. As if eighty-four straight victories were not enough. It was a miserable winter, but Messina endured. Next season, Rake's boys went 13-0 and slaughtered South Wayne for the state title. Other state championships followed, in 74, 75, and 79.
Then the drought. From 1980 until 1987, Neely's senior year, Messina went undefeated each season, easily won its conference and playoffs, only to lose in the state finals. There was discontent in Messina. The locals in the coffee shops were not happy. The old-timers longed for the days of The Streak. Some school in California won ninety in a row and the entire town of Messina was offended.
To the left of the Scoreboard, on green placards with white lettering, were the tributes to the greatest of all Messina heroes. Seven numbers had been retired, with Neely's 19 being the last. Next to it was number 56, worn by Jesse Trapp, a linebacker who played briefly at Miami then went to prison. In 1974, Rake had retired number 81, worn by Roman Armstead, the only Messina Spartan to play in the NFL.
Beyond the south end zone was a field house that any small college would envy. It had a weight room and lockers and a visitors' dressing room with carpet and showers. It too was built by the boosters after an intense capital campaign that lasted one winter and consumed the entire town. No expense was spared, not for the Messina Spartans football team. Coach Rake wanted weights and lockers and coaches' offices, and the boosters practically forgot about Christmas.
There was something different now, something Neely had not seen before. Just past the gate that led to the field house there was a monument with a brick base and a bronze bust on it. Neely walked over to take a look. It was Rake, an oversized Rake with wrinkles on the forehead and the familiar scowl around the eyes, yet just a hint of a smile. He wore the same weathered Messina cap he'd worn for decades.
A bronze Eddie Rake, at fifty, not the old man of seventy. Under it was a plaque with a glowing narrative, including the details that almost anyone on the streets of Messina could rattle off from memory-thirty-four years as Coach of the Spartans, 418 wins, 62 losses, 13 state titles, and from 1964 to 1970 an undefeated streak that ended at 84.
It was an altar, and Neely could see the Spartans bowing before it as they made their way onto the field each Friday night. The wind picked up and scattered leaves in front of Neely. Practice was over and the soiled and sweaty players were trudging toward the field house. He didn't want to be seen, so he walked down the track and through a gate.
He climbed up thirty rows and sat all alone in the bleachers, high above Rake Field with a view of the valley to the east. Church steeples rose above the gold and scarlet trees of Messina in the distance. The steeple on the far left belonged to the Methodist church, and a block behind it, unseen from the bleachers, was a handsome two-story home the town had given to Eddie Rake on his fiftieth birthday.
And in that home Miss Lila and her three daughters and all the rest of the Rakes were now gathered, waiting for the Coach to take his last breath. No doubt the house was full of friends, too, with trays of food covering the tables and flowers stacked everywhere. Were any former players there? Neely thought not.
The next car into the parking lot stopped near Neely's. This Spartan wore a coat and tie, and as he walked casually across the track, he, too, avoided stepping onto the playing surface. He spotted Neely and climbed the bleachers.
Paul Curry caught forty-seven of the sixty-three touchdown passes Neely threw in their three-year career together. Crenshaw to Curry, time and time again, practically unstoppable. They had been cocaptains. They were close friends who'd drifted apart over the years.
They still called each other three or four times a year. Paul's grandfather built the first Messina bank, so his future had been sealed at birth. Then he married a local girl from another prominent family. Neely was the best man, and the wedding had been his last trip back to Messina.
Neely shook his head. They were sitting three feet apart, both gazing into the distance, chatting but preoccupied. There was noise from the field house as cars and trucks began leaving. "How's the team?" Neely asked. "Not bad, won four lost two. The coach is a young guy from Missouri. I like him. Talent's thin."
"I'm a banker and a Rotarian, but I can still outrun you." Paul stopped quickly, sorry that he'd blurted out the last phrase. Neely's left knee was twice the size of his right. "I'm sure you can," Neely said with a smile. No harm done. They watched the last of the cars and trucks speed away, most of them squealing tires or at least trying to. A lesser Spartan tradition.
"You had no choice in this town. Rake had us in uniforms when we were in the sixth grade. Four teams-red, blue, gold, and black, remember? No green because every kid wanted to wear green. We played Tuesday nights and drew more fans than most high schools. We learned the same plays Rake was calling on Friday night.
The same system. We dreamed of being Spartans and playing before ten thousand fanatics. By the ninth grade Rake himself was supervising our practices and we knew all forty plays in his book. Knew them in our sleep." "I still know them," Neely said. "So do I. Remember the time he made us run slot-waggle-right for two solid hours in practice?"
"You count the years until you get a varsity jersey, then you're a hero, an idol, a cocky bastard because in this town you can do no wrong. You win and win and you're the king of your own little world, then poof, it's gone. You play your last game and everybody cries. You can't believe it's over. Then another team comes right behind you and you're forgotten."
"Fifteen years, pal. When I was in college, I would come home for the holidays and stay away from this place. I wouldn't even drive by the school. Never saw Rake, didn't want to. Then one night in the summertime, right before I went back to college, just a month or so before they fired him, I bought a six-pack and climbed up here and replayed all the games. Stayed for hours. I could see us out there scoring at will, kicking ass every game. It was wonderful. Then it hurt like hell because it was over, our glory days gone in a flash."
In my case, the difficulties of the participant element are somewhat reduced, as I have chosen to study the complexities of my own native culture. This is not because I consider the English to be intrinsically more interesting than other cultures, but because I have a rather wimpish aversion to the dirt, dysentery, killer insects, ghastly food and primitive sanitation that characterize the mud-hut ‘tribal’ societies studied by my more intrepid colleagues.
In the macho field of ethnography, my avoidance of discomfort and irrational preference for cultures with indoor plumbing are regarded as quite unacceptably feeble, so I have, until recently, tried to redeem myself a bit by studying the less salubrious aspects of English life: conducting research in violent pubs, seedy nightclubs, run-down betting shops and the like.
Yet after years of research on aggression, disorder, violence, crime and other forms of deviance and dysfunction, all of which invariably take place in disagreeable locations and at inconvenient times, I still seemed to have risen no higher in the estimation of mud-hut ethnographers accustomed to much harsher conditions.
So, having failed my trial-by-fieldwork initiation test, I reasoned that I might as well turn my attention to the subject that really interests me, namely: the causes of good behaviour. This is a fascinating field of enquiry, which has been almost entirely neglected by social scientists. With a few notable exceptions,2 social scientists tend to be obsessed with the dysfunctional, rather than the desirable, devoting all their energies to researching the causes of behaviours our society wishes to prevent, rather than those we might wish to encourage.
My Co-Director at the Social Issues Research Centre (SIRC), Peter Marsh, had become equally disillusioned and frustrated by the problem-oriented nature of social science, and we resolved to concentrate as much as possible on studying positive aspects of human interaction. With this new focus, we were now no longer obliged to seek out violent pubs, but could spend time in pleasant ones (the latter also had the advantage of being much easier to find, as the vast majority of pubs are congenial and trouble-free).
We could observe ordinary, lawabiding people doing their shopping, instead of interviewing security guards and store detectives about the activities of shoplifters and vandals. We went to nightclubs to study flirting rather than fighting. When I noticed some unusually sociable and courteous interaction among the crowds at a racecourse, I immediately began what
turned out to be three years of research on the factors influencing the good behaviour of racegoers. We also conducted research on celebration, cyber-dating, summer holidays, embarrassment, corporate hospitality, van drivers, risk taking, the London Marathon, sex, mobile-phone gossip and the relationship between tea-drinking and DIY (this last dealing with burning social issues such as ‘how many cups of tea does it take the average Englishman to put up a shelf?’).
Over the past twelve years, my time has thus been divided roughly equally between studying the problematic aspects of English society and its more appealing, positive elements (along with cross-cultural, comparative research in other parts of the world), so I suppose I can safely claim to have embarked on the specific research for this book with the advantage of a reasonably balanced overview.
For a start, the first rule of English pub-talk tells us why pubs are such a vital part of our culture. This is the sociability rule: the bar counter of the pub is one of the very few places in England where it is socially acceptable to strike up a conversation with a complete stranger. At the bar counter, normal rules of privacy and reserve are suspended, we are granted temporary ‘remission’ from our conventional social inhibitions, and friendly conversation with strangers is considered entirely appropriate and normal behaviour.
Foreign visitors often find it hard to come to terms with the fact that there is no waiter service in English pubs. Indeed, one of the most poignant sights of the English summer (or the funniest, depending on your sense of humour) is the group of thirsty tourists sitting patiently at a pub table, waiting for someone to come and take their order.
My first, callously scientific, response to this sight was to take out my stopwatch and start timing how long it would take tourists of different nationalities to realise that there was no waiter service. (For the record, the fastest time – two minutes, twenty-four seconds – was achieved by a sharp-eyed American couple; the slowest – forty-five minutes, thirteen seconds – was a group of young Italians, although to be fair, they were engrossed in an animated debate about football and did not appear much concerned about the apparent lack of service.
A French couple marched out of the pub, muttering bitterly about the poor service and les Anglais in general, after a twenty-four-minute wait.) Once I had obtained sufficient data, however, I became more sympathetic, eventually to the point of writing a little paperback book on pub etiquette for tourists. The field research for this book – a sort of nine-month nationwide pub-crawl – also provided much useful material on Englishness.
In the pub-etiquette book, I explained that the sociability rule only applies at the bar counter, so having to go up to the bar to buy drinks gives the English valuable opportunities for social contact. Waiter service, I pointed out, would isolate people at separate tables.
This may not be a problem in more naturally outgoing and sociable cultures, where people do not require any assistance to strike up a conversation with those seated near them, but, I argued rather defensively, the English are somewhat reserved and inhibited, and we need all the help we can get. It is much easier for us to drift casually into ‘accidental’ chat while waiting at the bar counter than deliberately to break into the conversation at a neighbouring table. The no-waiter-service system is designed to promote sociability.
But not rampant, uncontrolled sociability. ‘Cultural remission’ is not just a fancy academic way of saying ‘letting your hair down’. It does not mean abandoning all inhibitions and doing exactly as you please. It means, quite specifically, a structured, ordered, conventionalized relaxation of normal social conventions.
In English pubs, the suspension of normal privacy rules is limited to the bar counter, and in some cases, to a lesser degree, to tables situated very near the counter – those furthest from the bar being universally understood to be the most ‘private’. I found a few other exceptions: the sociability rule also applies to a more limited extent (and subject to quite strict rules of introduction) around the dart-board and pool table, but only to those standing near the players: the tables in the vicinity of these games are still ‘private’.
The English need the social facilitation of legitimised deviance at the bar counter, but we also still value our privacy. The division of the pub into ‘public’ and ‘private’ zones is a perfect, and very English, compromise: it allows us to break the rules, but ensures that we do so in a comfortingly ordered and rule-governed manner.
Before we can even begin to explore the complex etiquette involved in pub-talk, we stumble across another rule of pub behaviour that involves a brief digression from our focus on conversation rules, but will help us to prove (in the correct sense of ‘test’) a ‘rule of Englishness’. The issue is queuing. The bar counter is the only place in England in which anything is sold without the formation of a queue.
Many commentators have observed that queuing is almost a national pastime for the English, who automatically arrange themselves into orderly lines at bus stops, shop counters, ice-cream vans, entrances, exits, lifts – and, according to some of the baffled tourists I interviewed, sometimes in the middle of nowhere for no apparent reason.
According to George Mikes: ‘an Englishman, even if he is alone, forms an orderly queue of one.’ When I first read this comment, I thought it was an amusing exaggeration, but then I started to observe people more closely, and found not only that it was true, but also that I do it myself. When waiting alone for a bus or at a taxi stop, I do not just lounge about anywhere roughly within striking distance of the stop, as people do in other countries – I stand directly under the sign, facing in the correct direction, exactly as though I were at the head of a queue.
I form an orderly queue of one. If you are English, you probably do this too. In our drinking-places, however, we do not form an orderly queue at all: we gather haphazardly along the bar counter. At first, this struck me as contrary to all English instincts, rules and customs, until I realised that there is in fact a queue, an invisible queue, and that both the bar staff and the customers are aware of each person’s position in this queue. Everyone knows who is next: the person who reached the bar counter before you will be served before you, and any obvious attempt to get served out of turn will be ignored by the bar staff and
severely frowned upon by other customers. In other words, it will be treated as queue-jumping. The system is not infallible, but English bar staff are exceptionally skilled at identifying who is next in the invisible queue. The bar counter is ‘the exception that proves the rule’ about English queuing: it is only an apparent exception – and another example of the orderly nature of English disorder.
The rules of English pub-talk regulate non-verbal as well as verbal communication – in fact, some of them actively prohibit use of the verbal medium, such as the pantomime rule. Bar staff do their best to ensure that everyone is served in proper turn, but it is still necessary to attract their attention and make them aware that one is waiting to be served.
There is, however, a strict etiquette involved in attracting the attention of bar staff: this must be done without speaking, without making any noise and without resorting to the vulgarity of obvious gesticulation. (Yes, we are back in Looking-Glass land again. The truth of English etiquette is indeed stranger than even the strangest of fiction.)
The prescribed approach is best described as a sort of subtle pantomime – not the kind of pantomime we see on stage at Christmas, but more like an Ingmar Bergman film in which the twitch of an eyebrow speaks volumes. The object is to make eye contact with the barman. But calling out to him is not permitted, and almost all other obvious means of attracting attention, such as tapping coins on the counter, snapping fingers or waving are equally frowned upon.
It is acceptable to let bar staff know one is waiting to be served by holding money or an empty glass in one’s hand. The pantomime rule allows us to tilt the empty glass, or perhaps turn it slowly in a circular motion (some seasoned pubgoers told me that this indicates the passing of time). The etiquette here is frighteningly precise: it is permitted to perch one’s elbow on the bar, for example, with either money or an empty glass in a raised hand, but not to raise one’s whole arm and wave the notes or glass around.
The pantomime rule requires the adoption of an expectant, hopeful, even slightly anxious expression. If a customer looks too contented, bar staff may assume that he or she is already being served. Those waiting to be served must stay alert and keep their eye on the bar staff at all times.
Once eye contact is made, a quick lift of the eyebrows, sometimes accompanied by an upward jerk of the chin, and a hopeful smile, lets the staff know you are waiting. They respond to these pantomime signals with a smile or a nod, a raised finger or hand, and perhaps a similar eyebrow-lift. This is code for ‘I see that you are waiting and will serve you as soon as possible’.
The English perform this pantomime sequence instinctively, without being aware of following a rigid etiquette, and never question the extraordinary handicaps (no speaking, no waving, no noise, constant alertness to subtle non-verbal signals) imposed by the rule. Foreigners find the eyebrow-twitching pantomime ritual baffling – incredulous tourists often told me that they could not understand how the English ever managed to buy themselves a drink – but it is surprisingly effective. Everyone does get served, usually in the right order, and without undue fuss, noise or argument.
Researching the pantomime rule (and the other unwritten rules of pub behaviour) was something of a test of my own ability to stand back from my native culture and observe it as a detached scientist. As a native pubgoer, I had always performed the pantomime ritual automatically, like everyone else, without ever questioning or even noticing its strange and complex rules. But to write the pub-etiquette book, I had to force myself to become a ‘professional alien’, even in my own local pub.
It is quite an interesting (although somewhat disconcerting) mental exercise, to clear one’s mind of everything one normally takes for granted – and to scrutinise, dissect and question every detail of a routine which is almost as familiar, mindless and mechanical as brushing one’s teeth. When the little pub-etiquette book came out, some English readers told me that it was equally disconcerting to read the results of this exercise.
There is one important exception to the pantomime rule, and as usual it is a rule-governed exception. While waiting to be served at a pub bar counter, you may hear people calling out to the bar staff ‘Oi, any chance of a bloody drink sometime this millennium?’ or ‘Get a move on: I’ve been stood here since last Thursday!’ or committing other blatant breaches of the pantomime rule.
You would be advised not to follow their example: the only people permitted to speak in this manner are the established ‘regulars’ (regular customers of the pub), and the rude remarks are made in the context of the special etiquette governing relations between bar staff and regulars.
The rules governing the ordering of drinks, however, apply to everyone. First, it is customary in England for just one or at the most two members of a group to go up to the bar to order drinks for the group, and for only one to make the actual payment.
(This rule is not merely designed to make life easier for bar staff, or to avoid that English pet hate ‘fuss’. It is related to another complex set of rules: the etiquette of round-buying, which will be covered later.) Second, the correct way to order a beer is ‘A pint of bitter [or lager], please’. For a half-pint, this is always shortened to ‘Half a bitter [or lager], please’.
The ‘please’ is very important: foreigners or novices will be forgiven mistakes in other elements of the order, but omitting the ‘please’ is a serious offence. It is also vital to say ‘thank-you’ (or ‘thanks’, or ‘cheers’, or at the very least the non-verbal equivalent – eye contact, nod and smile), when the drinks are handed over, and again when the change is given.
This rule applies not just in pubs, but when ordering or purchasing anything, anywhere in England: in shops, restaurants, trains, buses and hotels, staff expect to be treated politely, and this means saying please and thank-you. The politeness is reciprocal: a bartender or shop assistant will say, ‘That’ll be four pounds fifty, then, please’, and will usually say ‘Thank you’, or an equivalent, when you hand over the money. The generic rule is that every request (by either staff or customer) must end with ‘please’ and every fulfilment of a request (ditto) requires a ‘thank-you’.
During my research on Englishness, I diligently counted all the pleases and thank-yous involved in every purchase I made, and found that, for example, a typical transaction in a newsagent’s or corner shop (such as, say, my usual purchase of a bar of chocolate, a newspaper and a packet of cigarettes) usually involves two pleases and three thank-yous (although there is no upper limit on thank-yous, and I have often counted five).
The simple purchase of a drink and a packet of crisps in a pub also typically requires two pleases and three thank-yous. England may be a highly class-conscious society, but these politeness rules suggest that the culture is also, in many ways, remarkably egalitarian – or at least that it is not done to draw attention to status differences.
Service staff may often be of a lower social class than their customers (and linguistic class-indicators ensure that where this is the case both parties will be aware of it), but there is a conspicuous lack of servility in their demeanour, and the unwritten rules require that they be treated with courtesy and respect. Like all rules, these are sometimes broken, but when this does occur, it is noticed and frowned upon.
In the special social micro-climate of the pub, I found that the rules of egalitarian courtesy are even more complex, and more strictly observed. For example, it is not customary in English pubs to tip the publican or bar staff who serve you. The usual practice is, instead, to buy them a drink.
To give bar staff a tip would be an impolite reminder of their ‘service’ role, whereas to offer a drink is to treat them as equals. The rules governing the manner in which such drinks must be offered reflect both polite egalitarianism and a peculiarly English squeamishness about money.
The prescribed etiquette for offering a drink to the publican or bar staff is to say, ‘And one for yourself?’ or ‘And will you have one yourself?’ at the end of your order. The offer must be clearly phrased as a question, not an instruction, and should be made discreetly, not bellowed out in an unseemly public display of generosity.
If one is not ordering drinks, it is still acceptable to ask the bartender or publican ‘Will you have a drink?’ but the ‘And one for yourself?’ approach is much preferred, as it implies that the customer and the bartender are having a drink together, that the bartender is being included in the ‘round’.
I observed that the English also tend to avoid using the word ‘buy’. To ask, ‘Can I buy you a drink?’ would in theory be acceptable, but in practice is rarely heard, as it carries the suggestion that money is involved. The English are perfectly well aware that money is involved, but prefer not to call attention to the fact.
We know that the publican and bar staff are providing us with a service in exchange for money – and indeed that the ‘And one for yourself?’ ritual is a somewhat convoluted and tortuous way of giving them a tip – but it would be indecorous to highlight the pecuniary aspects of this relationship.
And the bar staff collude in this squeamishness. If the ‘And one for yourself?’ offer is accepted, it is customary for bar staff to say, ‘Thanks, I’ll have a half [or whatever]’ and add the price of their chosen drink to the total cost of the order.
They will then state the new total clearly: ‘That’ll be five pounds twenty, then, please’ – thus indirectly letting you know the price of the drink you have just bought them, without actually mentioning the amount (which in any case will not be large, as the unwritten rules require them to choose a relatively inexpensive drink). By stating the revised total, they are also, in a subtle and oblique manner, making the customer aware of their abstemious choice of beverage.
The understanding that this is not a tip but an invitation to ‘join’ the customer in a drink, is also reinforced by the behaviour of the bar staff when consuming the drink. They will always raise their glass in the customer’s direction, and say ‘Cheers’ or ‘Thanks’, which is normal practice between friends on receiving a drink as part of a ‘round’. When the bar is particularly busy, the staff may not have time to pour or consume the drink immediately.
It is quite acceptable in these circumstances for them to accept the ‘And one for yourself?’ offer, add the price of their drink to the customer’s order, and enjoy the drink later when the bar is less crowded. On pouring the drink, however, even several hours later, bar staff will go to some lengths to ensure that they catch the relevant customer’s eye and raise the glass in acknowledgement, with a nod and a smile – and a ‘cheers’ if the customer is within earshot.
It could be argued that, although more egalitarian than conventional tipping, this ‘one-way commensality’ – giving without receiving in return – is none the less a dominance signal. This argument would have some merit, were it not that the gesture is often reciprocated by publicans and bar staff, who will usually not allow a customer, particularly a regular, to buy them many drinks before attempting to return the favour.
There will still, in the final reckoning, be some asymmetry, but such reckonings never occur, and even an occasional reciprocation on the part of the publican or bar staff serves to maintain the impression of a friendly exchange between equals.
To many foreign visitors, the ‘And one for yourself?’ ritual seems like an unnecessarily circuitous and complicated way of giving a tip – a gesture accomplished almost everywhere else in the world by the simple handing over of a few coins. A bemused American, to whom I explained the rule, expressed incredulity at the ‘Byzantine’ nature of English pub etiquette, and a French visitor bluntly dismissed the entire procedure as ‘typical English hypocrisy’.
Although other foreigners told me that they found our convoluted courtesies charming, if somewhat bizarre, I have to admit that these two critics both have a point. English rules of politeness are undeniably rather complex, and, in their tortuous attempts to deny or disguise the realities of status differences, clearly hypocritical. But then, surely all politeness is a form of hypocrisy: almost by definition, it involves pretence.
The sociolinguists Brown and Levinson argue that politeness ‘presupposes [the] potential for aggression as it seeks to disarm it, and makes possible communication between potentially aggressive parties’. Also in the context of a discussion of aggression, Jeremy Paxman observes that our strict codes of manners and etiquette seem ‘to have been developed by the English to protect themselves from themselves’.
We are, perhaps more than many other cultures, intensely conscious of class and status differences. George Orwell correctly described England as ‘the most class-ridden country under the sun’. Our labyrinthine rules and codes of polite egalitarianism are a disguise, an elaborate charade, a severe collective case of what psychotherapists would call ‘denial’. Our polite egalitarianism is not an expression of our true social relations, any more than a polite smile is a manifestation of genuine pleasure or a polite nod a signal of real agreement.
Our endless pleases disguise orders and instructions as requests; our constant thank-yous maintain an illusion of friendly equality; the ‘And one for yourself?’ ritual requires an extraordinary act of communal self-deception, whereby we all agree to pretend that nothing so vulgar as money nor so degrading as ‘service’ is involved in the purchase of drinks in a bar.
Hypocrisy? At one level, clearly, yes: our politenesses are all sham, pretence, dissimulation – an artificial veneer of harmony and parity masking quite different social realities. But I have always understood the term hypocrisy to imply conscious, deliberate deception of others, whereas English polite egalitarianism seems to involve a collective, even collaborative, self-delusion.
Our politenesses are evidently not a reflection of sincere, heartfelt beliefs, but neither are they cynical, calculating attempts to deceive. And perhaps we need our polite egalitarianism to protect us from ourselves – to prevent our acute consciousness of class differences from expressing itself in less acceptable ways.
The English obsession with home-improvements is not just about territorial marking, of course. It is also about self-expression in a wider sense: your home is not just your territory, it is your primary expression of your identity. Or at least that is how we like to think of it.
Almost all of our DIY-temple sample saw themselves as exercising their creative talents, and other interviews with nestbuilders in furniture shops, department stores and homes confirm that although DIYing may be, for some, merely an economic necessity, we all see the arrangement, furnishing and decorating of our homes as an expression of our unique personal taste and artistic flair.
And it is, but only up to a point. The more closely I researched this question, the more it became clear that the way in which we arrange, furnish and decorate our homes is largely determined by social class. This has little or nothing to do with wealth. Upper-class and upper-middle-class homes tend to be shabby, frayed and unkempt in a way no middle-middle or lower-middle would tolerate, and the homes of the wealthiest working-class nouveaux-riches are full of extremely expensive items that the uppers and upper-middles regard as the height of vulgarity.
The brand-new leather sofas and reproduction-antique dining chairs favoured by the middle-middles may cost ten times as much as the equivalent items in the houses of upper-middles, who despise leather and ‘repro’.
In the homes of the middle-middles and below, the ‘lounge’ (as they call it) is likely to have a fitted carpet (among the older working classes, this may be a patterned carpet; among nouveaux-riches, deep-pile). The higher castes prefer bare floorboards, often part-covered with old Persian carpets or rugs. The middle-middle ‘lounge’ might have a cocktail cabinet, and their dining room a hostess trolley.
The contents of lower-middle and some upper-working ‘front rooms’ will often be obscured by net curtains (useful as a class-indicator, but otherwise something of an annoying obstacle to peeping-tom researchers) but they are likely to be dominated by large television sets and, among the older generations, may boast embroidered or lacy covers on the arms of chairs and carefully displayed ‘collections’ of small objects (spoons, glass animals, Spanish dolls, figurines) from package holidays or mail-order catalogues.
Younger lower-middles and upper-workings may have less fussy tastes – their ‘living rooms’ are often uncluttered to the point of dentist’s-waiting-room bleakness (perhaps aspiring to, but never approaching, stylish minimalism). They will compensate for this lack of visual interest with an even bigger wide-screen television, which they call the TV or telly and which is always the focal point of the room (and, incidentally, currently shows at least six programmes every week about homes and home-improvement) and a high-tech ‘music centre’ with big speakers.
Many upper-middle homes also have big televisions and stereos, but they are usually hidden in another sitting room, sometimes called the ‘back room’ or ‘family room’ (not ‘music room’: when upper-middles say ‘music room’, they mean the one with the piano in it, not the stereo).
Coasters (little mats for putting drinks on to stop them damaging the tables) are another useful classindicator: you are unlikely to find these in upper-middle or upper-class houses, nor will you often see them in lower-working-class homes. Coasters are the preserve of the middle-middle, lower-middle and upper-working classes – or rather, more specifically, those among the upper-workings who aspire to middle-class status.
The lower-middle and working-class lavatories, which they call toilets, may have matching coloured loos and basins, which they call bathroom suites, and even matching coloured loo paper. Those of the upper-middles and above will almost always be plain white, although you will sometimes see a wooden loo seat.
At the highest and lowest ends of the scale (upper-middle and above, lower-working and below) you will find old, threadbare and mismatched furniture, while the classes in between favour brand-new ‘suites’ of matching ‘settees’ and armchairs, ‘sets’ of matching dining tables and chairs, and yet more ‘suites’ of bedroom furniture with matching bedspreads, cushions and curtains. (These carefully co-ordinated furnishings may involve cottagey-chintzy flowers, Conran-Ikea ‘simplicity’, or television-inspired ‘themes’ but the principle is the same.)
The upper echelons, proud of their eclectic antiques, sneer at matching ‘suites’; the lower echelons, ashamed of their ill-assorted cast-offs, aspire to them. In fact, an English person’s social class can be gauged immediately from his or her attitude to expensive brand-new furniture: if you think it is ‘posh’, you are no higher than middle-middle at best; if you think it is ‘naff’, you are upper-middle or above.
An upper-class Tory MP once sneered at fellow Tory Michael Heseltine by remarking that Heseltine had ‘had to buy all his own furniture’ – the put-down implication being that only nouveaux have to buy their furniture: genuinely upper-class furniture is inherited.
Another helpful class-indicator is the siting of what Americans would call your ‘brag wall’. In which room of your house do you display prestigious awards you have won, or photographs of yourself shaking hands with famous people? If you are middle-middle or below, these items will be proudly on show in your sitting room or entrance hall or some other very prominent place. For the upper-middles and above, however, the only acceptable place to exhibit such things is the downstairs loo.
This trick is ‘smart’ in both senses of the word (posh and clever): visitors are highly likely to use the downstairs loo at some point, and to be impressed by your achievements, but by displaying them in the loo you are making a joke out of them (taking the piss, even) and thus cannot be accused of either boasting or taking yourself too seriously.
From the outside of an English house, even if you are not familiar with the class-semiotics of plants and flowers, which I will come to later, you can make a quick broad-brush class assessment based on the presence (lower class) or absence (higher class) of a satellite dish.
This is not an infallible indicator – although many people classify entire neighbourhoods by counting satellite dishes – but a house with a satellite dish can be classified at the lower end of the social scale until proven otherwise by the presence of unequivocal upper-middle or upperclass features.
A satellite dish on a very grand old house in an upper-class area could, however, be a sign of nouveau colonization. But to be sure, you would have to go inside and look for cocktail cabinets, thick carpets, brand-new leather sofas, circular baths and gold taps.
If instead you found faded colours, priceless but threadbare oriental rugs, shabby damask sofas covered in dog hair and cracked wooden loo seats, you would revise the occupants’ social class upwards, and assume that they had some suitable reason for watching satellite television – work in broadcasting or journalism, perhaps (check for BAFTAs in the downstairs loo) or an eccentric passion for basketball or sit-coms or some other aspect of popular culture.
Which brings me to a further complicating factor: taste is often judged, in social terms, not by the deed but by the doer. If someone is securely established as a member of a particular class, his or her house may feature a number of exceptions to the rules I have mentioned without any danger of reclassification downwards or upwards.
I read somewhere recently that Princess Anne’s house, Gatcombe Park, is cluttered with displays of every gift she has ever received, including the sort of tacky national dolls and cheap African carvings normally only found in working-class ‘front rooms’. Such signs of plebeian tastes among the upper classes or even longestablished upper-middles are generally regarded as harmless eccentricities.
And it works the other way round as well. I had a friend of impeccable working-class credentials – a school cleaner, living on a run-down council estate – who had a passion for the upper-class equestrian sport of eventing (also known as Horse Trials, and also, incidentally, favoured by Princess Anne).
She kept a horse (free in return for mucking-out) at a nearby riding school, and her council-house kitchen was festooned with rosettes and photographs of herself competing in local hunter-trials and one-day events. Her working-class friends and neighbours accepted her ‘posh’ horsey doings and decorations as an innocuous quirk, a somewhat eccentric hobby which in no way affected her status as their social equal.
This ‘eccentricity clause’ seems to be most reliably effective at the top and bottom ends of the social scale. The middle-middle, lower-middle, upper-working and even upper-middle zones are more vulnerable to reclassification on the grounds of perceived deviation from the class norm. Here, a single lapse in home-decorating taste may be forgiven or disregarded, but two or more could be damaging.
Even among the less vulnerable, it is safest to choose your eccentricity from a class at the opposite end of the scale, rather than from the one immediately adjacent to your own. An upper-middle showing evidence of middle-middle tastes, for example, is much more likely to be suspected and downgraded than an upper-middle with a penchant for an unmistakably proletarian item of furniture or decoration.
In borderline cases, well-intentioned gifts can pose a problem for the class-conscious English. I was once given some very pretty wooden coasters, and not having any tables worth protecting from drink-stains – nor, I must admit, wishing to be suspected of the bourgeois instinct to do so – I use them to prop open my dodgy windows. I could get the broken sashes mended instead, of course, but then what would I do with the coasters? Being English can be quite tricky sometimes.
Whatever your social class, there are rules governing not only what you must do when you move into a house, but also how you should talk about it – or rather, to be more precise, how you should moan about it.
When talking about your house-move, it must always be described as traumatic, fraught with difficulty and disruption, even if in fact the process was completed smoothly and without noticeable stress. This rule applies to the initial house-hunting, the purchase of the house, the move itself, any DIY undertaken upon moving in, and ‘having the builders in’: it is universally understood that all of these are ‘a nightmare’.
To describe them in any more favourable or even neutral terms would be regarded as odd, possibly even as arrogant – as somehow implying that you are immune to the stresses and upsets afflicting all normal house-buyers.
There is a modesty-rule implied here as well. The more grand or desirable your new residence, the more you must emphasize the troubles, inconveniences and ‘nightmares’ involved in its acquisition and improvement. One does not boast about one’s purchase of a beautiful Cotswold cottage or even a château in France: one moans about the awfulness of the estate agents, the carelessness of the removal men, the obtuseness of the local builders or the dire state of the plumbing, roof, floors or garden.
Done well, with just the right air of long-suffering humour, this kind of English moaning can be remarkably convincing, and highly effective in deflecting envy. I have found myself sympathizing – genuinely sympathizing – with the beleaguered new owners of just such bijou cottages and grand chateaux. Even if you are not convinced, and indeed even if you are boiling with envy, resentment or righteous indignation, the correct response is to express sympathy: ‘How infuriating!’ ‘You must be exhausted!’
At one level, this ritual moaning is of course an indirect boast – an excuse to talk about one’s new property and convey its attractions without appearing to crow. At the same time, however, it can also be seen as another manifestation of English ‘polite egalitarianism’, a less invidious form of hypocrisy.
The moaners, by emphasising the mundane practical details and difficulties of home-buying or moving, are focusing on problems they and their listeners have in common, matters with which we can all identify, and politely deflecting attention from any potentially embarrassing disparity in wealth or status.
I could sympathize with my château-buying friends because their laments centred on the only element of their situation that could be compared with my own humble removals from one cheap flat to another. But this practice is observed by all classes, and in circumstances of much less dramatic income-disparity. Only the most vulgar nouveaux-riches break the rule and tell house-move stories that blatantly advertise their superior wealth.
Similar modesty rules apply to the discussion of house prices, compounded by the usual English squeamishness about money-talk. Although conversations about house prices have become a staple at middle-class dinner parties, they are conducted in accordance with a delicate etiquette. It is absolutely forbidden to ask directly what someone paid for their house (or indeed any item in their house): this is almost as unforgivably rude as asking them what they earn.
In the interests of science, I deliberately broke this rule a few times. Well, to be honest I only really did it twice. My first attempt doesn’t count, as I hedged my price-enquiry about with so many anxious apologies and qualifiers and excuses (such as a fictitious friend thinking of buying a house in the area) that it could not possibly be considered a direct question. Even so, the experience was not wasted, as the reactions of my unwitting labrats indicated that my apologies and excuses were not seen as at all excessive or out of place.
On the two occasions when I managed to steel myself, take a deep breath and ask the house-price question properly (or rather, improperly), the lab-rats responded with predictable embarrassment. They answered my question, but in an awkward, uncomfortable manner: one forced himself to mutter an approximate price, then hastily changed the subject; the other, a female, laughed nervously and replied with her hand half-covering her mouth, while her other guests looked sideways at me, coughed uneasily and exchanged raised-eyebrow glances across the table.
Yes, all right: raised eyebrows and a bit of embarrassed throat-clearing are probably the worst that can happen to you when you commit breaches of English dinner-party etiquette, so my experiments might not sound particularly heroic. Maybe you have to be English to know just how wounding those eyebrows and coughs can be.
The house-talk rules also state that it is not done to introduce the price paid for your own house into the conversation without good cause and suitable preamble. The price of your house can only be mentioned ‘in context’, and even then only if this can somehow be done in a self-deprecating manner, or at least in a such a way as to make it clear that you are not engaging in an ostentatious display of wealth. You can mention the price of your house, for example, if you bought it many years ago, for what now seems a ludicrously low sum.
The current value of your house, for some unfathomable reason, is a different matter, and may be the subject of endless discussion and speculation – although current property prices, including the estimated value of your own property, must always be described as ‘silly’, ‘crazy’, ‘absurd’ or ‘outrageous’.
This perhaps gives us a clue as to why value can be discussed while price cannot: it seems that the current value of a house is regarded as a matter entirely outside our control, rather like the weather, while the price actually paid for a house is a clear indicator of a person’s financial status.
I returned to Melbourne early this week after nearly two months out of Australia. Before I had even left the airport terminal, I was confronted by the labor and skills shortage that has dominated headlines in the country — via chaos among the baggage carousels.
So acute is the dearth of baggage handlers in Australia that Qantas, the national airline, recently implored its top brass to do a three-month embed with ground operations staff. In an email, Colin Hughes, the chief operating officer, called on Qantas managers and executives to take on shifts in baggage-handling roles, slinging suitcases of up to 70 pounds each.
It’s not just in the airports. Among the O.E.C.D. nations, Australia’s shortage of labor and skills is second in severity only to Canada’s. That has affected almost every sector: transportation, but also health care, food service, construction and real estate. And signs of the problem are everywhere.
Walking down Chapel Street the next day, I spotted a chalkboard sign outside a French restaurant warning pointedly of a shortage of workers, and of delayed service for would-be customers. “Seems like no one wants to work these days!” it read.
In the United States, a similar shortage has variously been described as a Great Renegotiation, a Great Rethink or a Great Resignation, with more than 40 million people leaving their jobs last year, often for better-paying ones. In Australia, Josh Frydenberg, the former federal treasurer, has tried to recast it as a Great Reshuffle.
Australia and New Zealand are nations of migrants, which may encompass those moving permanently and those who intend to return to their home country. Roughly 30 percent of the population in both nations was born overseas, according to data from the United Nations. The countries have been built up over many decades by waves of people arriving from Europe, Asia and elsewhere in the Pacific; their projected future growth has been predicated on the arrival of yet more migrants, hoping to build a better life.
Between 2010 and 2019, Australia’s population grew by about 1.6 percent each year, with almost two-thirds of that coming from inward migration. But in 2020, when the country closed its borders to pursue a zero Covid strategy, migration to Australia slumped.
Even now, with skilled workers a valuable commodity in a tight global labor market, migration has not yet returned to prepandemic levels. A statement from the Department of Home Affairs acknowledged “the pressures facing the Australian community, in particular with respect to our economic recovery from Covid-19 and the demand for skilled workers.”
The government has also announced a forthcoming “Jobs and Skills Summit” and has increased the number of places available to working backpackers — who typically take jobs in tourism or the food service industry — by 30 percent. Even so, less than 80,000 working holiday visas were issued between 2021 and 2022, compared with more than 180,000 a year before the pandemic, according to data from the Department of Home Affairs.
Sign up for the Australia Letter Newsletter  Conversation starters about Australia and insight on the global stories that matter most, sent weekly by the Times’s Australia bureau. Plus: heaps of local recommendations. Get it sent to your inbox.
The effects of Covid-19 have laid bare some of the existing problems in Australia’s labor force, Alison Preston, an economist at the University of Western Australia, told me this week. Australian women participate in the work force at lower rates than men, often leaving full-time employment when they have children.
That has prompted sectors with many female workers, like teaching, health or child care, to address gaps with migration. “In the past, we’ve found nurses elsewhere; in Ireland, say, or India,” she said. “But that’s harder now.”
At the same time, skilled young people are departing in droves. For many Australians, this is the first opportunity to go overseas since 2020, after the country closed its borders and barred citizens from departing. In New Zealand, June was the 16th month in a row where more people departed the country than arrived, according to data released by its government this week, with 49,200 migrants arriving and 60,700 people departing.
Speaking to the nonprofit think tank Ceda around the outset of the pandemic, Paul Bloxham, HSBC’s chief economist for Australia and New Zealand, warned about the importance of migration to Australia’s economic growth — and of the dangers of prolonged border closures.
“A lot of what’s driven Australia’s growth in recent years has been strong population growth driven by migration,” he said. “This is going to present a lot of challenges for our growth story, if it turns out that migration stays weak for a considerable period of time.”
They have set fire to hay and manure along highways, dumped trash on roads to create traffic jams, and blockaded food distribution centers with their tractors, leading to empty shelves in supermarkets. Across the country, upside down flags wave from farmhouses in protest.
The anger of the farmers is directed at the government, which has announced plans for a national 50 percent reduction of nitrogen emissions by 2030, in line with European Union requirements to preserve protected nature reserves, that they believe unfairly targets them.
Factories and cars also emit large amounts of nitrogen and have not been targeted, they say, although the government said that cuts associated with both polluters would be addressed in the future.
Agriculture is responsible for the largest share of nitrogen emissions in the Netherlands, much of it from the waste produced by the estimated 1.6 million cows that provide the milk used to make the country’s famed cheeses, like Gouda and Edam.
To realize those planned cuts, thousands of farmers will be required to significantly reduce livestock numbers and the size of their farming operations. If they cannot meet the cuts the government demands of them, they may be forced to close their operations altogether.
The Dutch government has set aside about 25 billion euros, about $26 billion, to carry out its plan, and some of that money will be used to help farmers build more sustainable operations — or buy them out, if possible.
“My livelihood and my network is being threatened,” said Ben Apeldoorn, whose farm in the province of Utrecht has about 120 cows producing milk for making cheese. “You’re just no longer allowed to exist,” said Mr. Apeldoorn, 52, who has been a farmer for 30 years.
But activists and ecologists say that drastic measures are needed to cut emissions and allow the Netherlands do its part to address global warming — an aim that has become all the more urgent this summer as Europe faces record temperatures and drought.
And they say that the agriculture sector has to change. “If you have less livestock, you have less manure and less production of nitrogen,” said Wim van der Putten, a researcher at the Netherlands Institute of Ecology.
The World Wide Fund for Nature and other environmental organizations wrote in a letter to the Dutch minister of agriculture this month that “the transition to a sustainable agricultural and food system is urgent and necessary.” The letter also said that consumers in the Netherlands needed to do their part to make sure emissions targets were reached.
But while many in the nation of 17 million people have sympathized with the farmers, support for them seems to be dwindling. In July, about 39 percent of Dutch people said they supported the farmers’ protests, down from 45 percent the month before, according to a survey by a Dutch research firm.
Prime Minister Mark Rutte, who this month became the country’s longest-serving prime minister and has grappled with what is known in the Netherlands as “the nitrogen crisis,” has condemned the protests, calling them “unacceptable.”
“Willfully endangering others, damaging our infrastructure and threatening people who help clean up goes beyond all limits,” Mr. Rutte, who has met on several occasions with farmers, said recently on Twitter. Helma Breunissen, 47, a dairy farmer who with her husband also runs a veterinarian’s office, attended one of the meetings with Mr. Rutte to make her anger known.
“If half of the cattle needs to disappear, then my veterinary’s office will also end,” Ms. Breunissen said by telephone. “I don’t want a bag of money from the government, I just want to do my job.” Farmers also say they are frustrated that the government is not doing enough to find technical innovations or other ways to cut down emissions to avoid reducing livestock numbers.
But, said Mr. van der Putten from the Netherlands Institute of Ecology, technical solutions are not enough to realize the level of cuts needed given amount of nitrogen the country pumps out, much of it from the production of eggs, dairy and meat.
“The problem is that a solution now needs to be found in a very short term,” he said. “This isn’t a problem that arose in a few years, this is a problem of decades and everyone just kicked the can down the road.”
“We have to meet goals, those are set by European laws,” said Erwin Wunnekink, a farmer and the chairman of LTO, a farmers organization. “It’s not that we don’t want to meet goals, but it’s mostly the way this has happened.”
The Netherlands is also required under a 2019 law to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 to levels that are 95 percent lower than they were in 1990. Other plans include generating more electricity from wind turbines and solar panels — by 70 percent in 2030, and completely by 2050, according to the government.
In June, the government released a color-coded map of the country that laid out which areas of the country would need to cut the highest percentage of emissions, depending on their proximity to nature reserves. The percentages range from 12 percent to 95 percent.
“The impact of that was gigantic,” said Wytse Sonnema, a spokesman for LTO. That map was not just about individual farmers, he added, but about “the social future of the countryside.” The realization of the cuts will be carried out by provincial councils in cooperation with farmers. The deadline to complete the plans is July 1, 2023.
Christianne van der Wal, the minister of nature and nitrogen, has made clear that the government’s goals are fixed. She emphasized that the Netherlands needs to adhere to E.U. agreements, one of which includes the protection of nature in member states. “Structurally, we haven’t been keeping to those agreements for about 20 or 30 years,” she said in July.
Wilhelm Doeleman, a spokesman for Ms. van der Wal, said that details on how to cut emissions for other industries would be released in January. But, he said, “agriculture has the biggest share of the responsibility of nitrogen emissions.”
The Dutch government has long supported and stimulated agriculture with subsidies and other incentives in an effort to secure the country’s food supply and promote the export of agricultural products.
While many Dutch support the aims of for a greener Netherlands, some right-wing groups have expressed support for the Dutch farmers as a way of opposing climate activism. The right-wing Forum for Democracy has declared that “there is no climate crisis” and opposes the government’s plans.
And the Dutch farmers have also receive some support from abroad. “Farmers in the Netherlands — of all places — are courageously opposing the climate tyranny of the Dutch government, can you believe it?” former President Donald J. Trump said at a rally in July.
For now, a government-appointed mediator is engaged in negotiations between the farmers and the government. The mediator has said there is a “crisis of confidence” between the two sides.
He met with James A. Baker III, the United States secretary of state, and even gave Robert S. Strauss, the American ambassador, 70 pages of detailed schematics showing how the Soviets had bugged the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, along with a bag of the bugs themselves — a move that, even decades later, blemished Mr. Bakatin’s name among Russian nationalists.
He was much better liked by Western reporters, who often compared his disarming good looks to those of a news anchorman (he did bear a resemblance to the ABC newsman Peter Jennings). The novelist John le Carré interviewed him at length, as did the New York Times columnist William Safire.
Mr. le Carré came away impressed by Mr. Bakatin’s thoughtful transparency, Mr. Safire less so. “He is bamboozling the reformers and the Western press by using all the ringing words we like to hear,” Mr. Safire wrote.
Mr. Safire was on to something: Mr. Bakatin’s reforms fell short. He dissolved the K.G.B.’s board of directors but kept its members on the payroll. He promised to fire thousands of agents but let only a few dozen go.
He still believed in the Soviet Union, and he thought he could tame the security agency without having to kill it. But he also faced intense pressure from inside the government to keep the spy agency intact.
His counterpart in the Russian republic, Viktor Ivanenko, was a particularly dogged opponent, and when the Soviet Union disintegrated at the end of 1991 — and with it Mr. Bakatin’s job — Mr. Ivanenko effectively replaced him. He and his successors, including the future Russian president Vladimir V. Putin, rebuilt the agency, which is now known by its new Russian initials, F.S.B.
“It must be plainly said here that success was not achieved,” Mr. Bakatin told the Russian newspaper Izvestiya in 1992. “I do not believe that it was possible anyway to significantly reform anything in such a short time in the conditions that actually exist.”
“Thus,” he added, “I do not think that our special services have already become safe for our citizens. There are no laws, no control, no professional security services.” His career took a sudden turn in 1986, when Mr. Gorbachev pulled him to Moscow to serve in the Communist Party’s Central Committee. Two years later, he was named interior minister.
He graduated from the Novosibirsk Civil Engineering Institute in 1960. From 1961 to 1973, he worked as a foreman on large-scale construction projects around his hometown, a region rich in natural resources and busy with mining activity.
He joined the Communist Party in 1964 and nine years later went to work for the party full time. He rose steadily in the ranks, but by the early 1980s he seemed destined to remain a regional bureaucrat. He stood out, though, for his efforts to reform his corner of Soviet industry, pushing for decentralization from Moscow and limited economic liberalization.
“He was sure that I would never steal, and my weaknesses, my provincialism, were more to his advantage,” Mr. Bakatin told the Russian journalist Oleg Kashin in 2008. “Apparently, choosing me for this extremely important state post, he believed that I could be easily controlled.”
Mr. Bakatin brought his reformist agenda with him. He ended the use of paid informers by the Soviet police, introduced hot food for prisoners in pretrial detention and resisted efforts to use his ministry to suppress dissent.
Popular, handsome and well spoken, he quickly became a leading figure among Moscow reformers, and he was seen as a future prime minister or even a successor to Mr. Gorbachev. His survivors include his sons, Alexander and Dmitri, and at least one grandchild.
But as the country began to crack at the turn of the decade, Mr. Gorbachev had to shore up his right wing. He fired Mr. Bakatin in December 1990 and replaced him with two hard-liners, Boris K. Pugo and Gen. Boris V. Gromov. Less than a year later, Mr. Pugo helped lead the failed coup attempt.
Mr. Gorbachev kept Mr. Bakatin close, naming him to his security council, a circle of top advisers. In 1991, Mr. Bakatin ran against Boris N. Yeltsin for the presidency of Russia, reportedly at the behest of Mr. Gorbachev, who saw Mr. Yeltsin as a rival. Mr. Bakatin came in last out of six candidates, with just 3.5 percent of the vote.
Still, he was a good enough politician that Mr. Yeltsin bore little grudge. He urged Mr. Gorbachev to make Mr. Bakatin head of the K.G.B. and later, after the Soviet Union collapsed, offered to make him an ambassador to any country he wanted, save France or the United States. Mr. Bakatin declined.
After leaving the government, Mr. Bakatin became vice president of Reforma, a civic organization, and an adviser to Baring Vostok Capital Partners, an investment firm.
Though his success at the K.G.B. was limited and short-lived, Mr. Bakatin made at least one discovery that may have made all his efforts personally worthwhile. Among the agency’s hoard of secret documents, he discovered that its predecessor, the N.K.V.D., had arrested, tried and executed his grandfather, a teacher, in 1937, just two months before Mr. Bakatin was born.
A motorcade of black vehicles approached Brazil’s presidential palace on Thursday afternoon and then, surprisingly, stopped. To the delight of a crowd gathered under the afternoon sun, out of one of the cars stepped President Jair Bolsonaro.
About two dozen selfie-seekers swarmed the president, who smiled and posed for photos. It was one of the impromptu meet-and-greets that Mr. Bolsonaro has become known for during his campaign for re-election.
“I’m here every day, Bolsonaro. I want to see you be brave enough to come talk to me,” shouted the protester, Wilker Leão, as he recorded himself on his phone. Repeatedly, he hurled an insult at the president that roughly translates to “the pork-barrelers’ little lap dog,” though a bit more vulgar.
Then the cheerful vibe broke. One man in the crowd began shouting, demanding answers about one of Mr. Bolsonaro’s policies. Mr. Bolsonaro got back into his vehicle. Suddenly the president exited the vehicle, grabbed Mr. Leão’s shirt and tried to snatch his phone. “Come here,” Mr. Bolsonaro said, gripping Mr. Leão’s arm as he tried to get away. “I want to talk to you.”
It was a surprising scene, even by the standards of a president who has rewritten Brazil’s standards for how the leader of Latin America’s largest nation should act. (Think vulgar attacks on his rivals, a stream of false statements and a refusal to admit whether he has been vaccinated.) Video of the incident rocketed around the Brazilian internet — a president scuffling with a constituent just six weeks ahead of national elections.
To the political left in Brazil, it was another example of why Mr. Bolsonaro is not fit to serve in the nation’s highest office. To the right, it was another example of how Mr. Bolsonaro is authentic and a man not afraid to take on his critics.
What remains to be seen is the incident’s effect on the moderate voters who will effectively decide the election. Mr. Bolsonaro has consistently trailed former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva in opinion surveys, though he has recently gained ground, buoyed by Brazil’s improving economy. If no one receives a majority of the votes in the Oct. 2 election, there will be a runoff on Oct. 30.
Mexico’s former attorney general was arrested Friday in connection with the violent abduction and likely massacre of 43 students in 2014, a significant breakthrough in one of the most notorious atrocities in modern Mexican history.
He is the first high-level official to be detained in connection to the case, and the authorities said Friday that they had also issued more than 80 arrest warrants related to it, including for military officers, police officers and cartel members.
It was not immediately clear if any of those warrants had led to other arrests, but their sudden announcement came just a day after the Mexican government said an official inquiry had found the disappearance of the students to be a “crime of the state” involving every layer of government.
“It’s a very big deal,” said Tyler Mattiace, an Americas researcher at Human Rights Watch. “It shows a willingness and an interest in investigating and prosecuting not only the enforced disappearance of the students, but also the cover-up that happened afterward.”
The arrest of the former attorney general, Jesús Murillo Karam, outside his home in Mexico City on Friday afternoon sent shock waves across the country. The Mexican prosecutor’s office said he was charged with “forced disappearance, torture and obstruction of justice” in the case of the students, young men from a teachers’ college in the rural town of Ayotzinapa.
Mr. Murillo oversaw a wide-ranging cover-up of the event, which included testimony obtained through torture, according to the United Nations. A report on the disappearances that Mr. Murillo released in January 2015, calling it the “historical truth,” has been widely discredited by independent experts, and the attorney general resigned shortly after amid criticism of his handling of the case.
For all the scandals that plagued the previous government of President Enrique Peña Nieto, the current administration has obtained few convictions against former officials, including in a long-running graft investigation related to the Brazilian construction company Odebrecht. One of the top officials implicated in the case was extradited from Spain to Mexico in 2020, but formally charged with bribery only this year.
“It’s a good sign, a powerful, clear, important gesture,” Paula Mónaco Felipe, a journalist and author of “Ayotzinapa: Eternal Hours,” said of Mr. Murillo’s arrest and the warrants. “However, it remains to be seen if they will be prosecuted.”
The families of the 43 students, who have spent years fighting for justice but have often been met with indifference or hostility by the authorities, reacted to the news cautiously. In a statement issued through the Centro Prodh, a local advocacy group that represents them, they called the developments the beginning of a process that “could contribute to the accountability of the authorities involved.”
“The fathers and mothers are not moved by revenge or personal animosity against anyone,” the statement added, “but rather by the hope that the truth will be known and that this will help prevent similar events from ever happening again.”
Even in a country that had grown used to cartel-fueled carnage, the sudden disappearance of 43 students on a single night in September 2014 caused national outrage, with thousands taking to the streets in protest.
The night they disappeared, the students had commandeered several buses from a bus station in the town of Iguala, south of Mexico City, in order to transport their peers to a demonstration in the capital commemorating another student massacre from decades ago.
The practice of taking over buses was time-honored, and largely tolerated by local bus companies. But that night, the students were shot at and violently detained by the police and local gunmen, before being taken away in separate groups and most likely murdered.
The government’s subsequent cover-up of events only added salt to the wound, particularly given ample evidence that local, state and federal agents had probably been involved in the students’ abduction. Rights groups have also long suspected the military was involved, but in Mexico the armed forces generally operate with impunity.
The Mexican Army has been implicated in human rights abuses and forced disappearances for decades, going back to the 1970s, when hundreds of student protesters and dissidents were arbitrarily detained, tortured and disappeared. But despite wide-ranging evidence, military commanders have almost never faced justice.
That made it particularly stunning that in an announcement this week of the preliminary findings of a government truth commission, the government said that the army had had an informant among the students and yet took “no action” to protect or find the young man.
He remains among the missing 43, and the inquiry said there was no indication that any of the young men were still alive. The news was also surprising given Mr. López Obrador’s increasing reliance on the military for everything from building airports to distributing vaccines.
The subsequent announcement that members of the military, including commanders, had been charged with crimes related to the disappearance of the students was another significant step, rights activists said.
“Let us hope that there is justice in the Ayotzinapa case, which is an emblematic case,” said Ms. Mónaco. The case “could open the door to truth and justice in many others, in at least 50 years of abuses and crimes against humanity perpetrated by the Mexican armed forces.”
On one level, the process is the same: Defendants get charged. Some plead guilty, some go to trial. People are acquitted or convicted. But the context is very different. Jan. 6 was a political action that became a federal crime, and politics infuses these cases. Some defendants have argued that they’re being persecuted for their political beliefs.
Thompson’s defense was that Trump authorized him to go into the Capitol that day and that he was merely following Trump’s orders. That did not fly in front of a jury. I’ve never covered anything that’s taken place in an atmosphere as polarized as this one.
Trump seems to have motivated not only some Jan. 6 defendants to commit violence, but also people who have threatened the F.B.I. after agents searched his home, Mar-a-Lago, this month. Do you see parallels between the groups? The Ohio man who attacked the F.B.I. field office in Cincinnati this month was, in fact, outside the Capitol on Jan. 6. The F.B.I. investigated his role in the riot but never arrested him.
In a larger sense, one researcher has found that 15 to 20 million Americans think violence would be justified to return Trump to office. We’ve seen this in the reaction to the Mar-a-Lago raid, but I’m also concerned about what a potential criminal prosecution of Trump could bring. What will the reaction be if Trump is indicted? What will happen on the day he appears in court? What will happen if he goes to trial and is convicted? There may be moments when the risk of violence in defense of Trump is high.
As threats of violence become more widespread, it can create an atmosphere in which the threshold for committing actual violence is lowered. When violent rhetoric becomes pervasive, people willing to commit violence feel justified. They feel like there’s community support. It enables them. That’s a reality we all have to start grappling with.
A 22-year-old man was fatally shot in a national forest in Alabama last week by a woman pretending to be a stranded driver after the man and his girlfriend pulled over to help, the authorities said.
The man, Adam Simjee, and his girlfriend, Mikayla Paulus, both students at the University of Central Florida, were driving in Talladega National Forest, about 80 miles east of Birmingham, on the morning of Aug. 14 when they were flagged down by a woman claiming her car would not start, according to a statement from the Clay County Sheriff’s Office posted by television station WBRC.
The woman, Yasmine Hider, pulled out a gun and made the couple walk back into the woods, according to the statement. Mr. Simjee then pulled out his own gun, leading to an “exchange of gunfire” in which Ms. Hider was shot several times in the torso and Mr. Simjee was shot in the back, the statement said.
Ms. Hider was transported to a Birmingham hospital where she had surgery for her injuries. The authorities said she may be part of a group of people “living off the grid” in tents in the national forest who were reported to be “armed and potentially violent.”
The sheriff’s office said Ms. Hider faces charges that include one count of murder, two counts of kidnapping and two counts of robbery. Ms. Paulus, 20, who was not injured, tried to revive her boyfriend by administering CPR but he died at the scene, the authorities said.
Ms. Paulus told the authorities that at the time of the shooting, a second woman, later identified as Krystal Diane Pinkins, 36, had been standing in the woods. Ms. Hider, the assailant, had called out to Ms. Pinkins to help her but she fled, according to officials. It was at this point that Ms. Paulus was able to get her phone and call 911, the statement said.
A tracking team from the Alabama Department of Corrections found what the authorities described as a “base camp” about half a mile from the scene of the shooting where they said they found Ms. Pinkins near a group of tents.
As officers ordered her to the ground, “a 5-year-old child ran from the woods holding a loaded shotgun,” the sheriff’s office statement said. The officers instructed the child, later identified as Ms. Pinkins’s son, to put down the shotgun but he kept going toward his mother before eventually putting it on the ground, officials said.
Ms. Pinkins was charged with one count of murder, two counts of kidnapping, two counts of robbery as well as endangering the welfare of a child. She remains in the Clay County Jail, according to sheriff’s records. Her son was taken into state care.
On Wednesday, David Law, a Clay County district court judge, ordered those involved in the case, including lawyers, witnesses, law enforcement personnel and “anyone else affiliated” with the case, not to discuss it because it could affect Ms. Pinkins’s right to a fair trial.
Every night, often well past midnight, C lay in bed with an iPod Touch they received from their grandparents as a 10th birthday gift. (C, who is being identified by their first initial for privacy reasons, is gender nonbinary and takes the pronoun “they.”) On the new device, C made friends on social media and uploaded selfies. Viewers posted compliments on a photo of C standing in an orchard, holding an apple and “looking like a full adult,” C said.
Less welcome were the comments from men who sent pictures of their genitals and asked C for nude images and for sex. “I had no idea what was happening,” C, who is now 22 and lives in Salt Lake City, said. “What do you do when someone’s just, like, sending you gross stuff in your inbox? Nothing. Just ignore it.”
That plan did not work out. The internet seeped into C’s psyche; severely depressed, they found kinship online with other struggling adolescents and learned ways to self-harm. “I don’t want to blame the internet, but I do want to blame the internet,” C said. “I feel like if I was born in 2000 B.C. in the Alps, I’d still be depressive, but I think it’s wildly exacerbated by the climate we live in.”
A yearlong series of articles by The Times has explored how the major risks to adolescents have shifted sharply in recent decades, from drinking, drugs and teen pregnancy to anxiety, depression, self-harm and suicide. The decline in adolescent mental health was underway before the pandemic; now it is a full-blown crisis, affecting young people across economic, racial and gender lines.
The trend has coincided with teenagers spending a growing amount of time online, and social media is commonly blamed for the crisis. In a widely covered study in 2021 first reported by The Wall Street Journal, Meta (formerly Facebook) found that 40 percent of girls on Instagram, which Meta owns, reported feeling unattractive because of social comparisons they experienced using the platform.
C grew up in an upper-middle-class family and displayed a gift for music from an early age. An uncle remembered C at 8 playing a flawless “Für Elise” on piano, with a bubbly Shirley Temple vibe. “An incredible talent, we were thinking Juilliard,” he said.
Mental health challenges ran in C’s family. In third grade, C began obsessively digging a pencil into one leg. Shortly after, puberty hit — “crazy early,” C recalled. “I was still in elementary school and suddenly my brain is, you know, working like 20 times faster on the dark stuff.”
At 10, C joined Mini Nation, a virtual community where they hoped to find friendship but instead faced harassment from men. C didn’t tell their parents, fearing they would take away the iPod. “It was my connection to the outside world,” C said.
The cutting intensified. “Self-harm was like a smoke break,” C said. “I would do it, watch a little YouTube, take a break, knife, come back.”
After classmates told a school counselor about the wounds on C’s arms, C spent a week in a psychiatric hospital, was prescribed Zoloft, and was sent home.
C’s family moved to Utah, hoping for a fresh start. But the challenges plaguing C could be found everywhere. From 2007 to 2016, emergency room visits for people aged 5 to 17 rose 117 percent for anxiety disorders, 44 percent for mood disorders and 40 percent for attention disorders, while overall pediatric visits were stable.
The same study, published in Pediatrics in 2020, found that visits for deliberate self-harm rose 329 percent. But visits for alcohol-related problems dropped 39 percent, reflecting the change in the kind of public health risks posed to teenagers.
Since 1900, the average age of the onset of puberty for girls has fallen to 12 from 14, a shift that health experts attribute in part to improvements in nutrition. (Puberty occurs about a year later for boys than for girls, and its onset has fallen, too.) In puberty, the brain is flooded with hormones and other neurochemicals that, among other things, render a young adolescent more sensitive to changes in social cues, according to brain-imaging research by Andrew Meltzoff, co-director of the University of Washington Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences.
But the regions of the brain responsible for self-regulation do not develop any faster or earlier than before. Psychosocial maturity — a person’s ability to exercise self-restraint in emotional situations — does not fully mature until the 20s, according to a 2019 paper published by the American Psychological Association that drew on research involving 5,000 teens from 11 countries.
Now, the combination of early puberty and information overload presents “a double whammy” that can lead to “anxiety and depression when people feel a lack of control,” Dr. Meltzoff said.
Researchers have been framing the issue around a particular set of questions: Is social media to blame for the rise in adolescent emotional distress? Is this a problem associated with consuming one type of information?
The results of numerous studies are conflicting, with some finding that heavy use of social media is associated with depressive symptoms and others finding little or no connection. The most reliable conclusion, researchers say, is that some teens are more vulnerable than others.
A 2018 study of lesbian, gay and bisexual teens found that social media was a double-edged sword, opening up new support networks but also exposing adolescents to animosity. “There are literally thousands of hate messages in an instant,” said Gary Harper, a professor of behavioral health at the University of Michigan.
At the same time, he said, social media also provides validation and community: “It’s good to have a variety of ways we can be, that affirms diverse identities.” He added, “But your brain needs to develop enough to sort through all that information.”
A 2019 study in the Netherlands reached a similarly equivocal conclusion. Over three weeks, the researchers asked 353 adolescents to report six times a day how often they had browsed Instagram and Snapchat in the past hour and to note how they had felt in that time and at the moment of reporting. Twenty percent of teens who used their phones to access social media said they felt worse — but 17 percent reported that their mood had improved.
“Children can react very differently,” said Patti Valkenburg, founder and director of Center for Research on Children, Adolescents and the Media at the University of Amsterdam, and co-author of the Dutch study. For instance, when they encounter people online who appear successful, “some can be envious and others can be inspired,” Dr. Valkenburg said.
One drug dealer set up a giant tent and a grill where he cooked sausages and played loud music. “Homeless people were using our alley as their bathroom,” Ms. McLean said, adding that food and other debris also attracted rats.
JustCare began its outreach. “Maybe two weeks later, they were like, ‘We found housing for everybody,’” Ms. McLean said. After moving day, the area was spotless‌, but soon another encampment ‌arose.
This time, after campers were housed, homeowners set up outdoor dining tables and chairs to “activate” the space, as suggested by JustCare. Now, residents and tourists regularly use the furniture, making it unattractive as a campsite.
Between the fall of 2020 and this past spring, JustCare closed 14 encampments and placed over 400 people in hotels and other lodging. Of the 135 people who had not found permanent homes by March, about two-thirds have now done so and 21 percent are in various stages of getting the documents and the access to housing they need. Preliminary numbers suggest that results are superior or equivalent to other programs for keeping people with mental illness and addictions housed.
Critics’ main concern is cost. Seattle’s former mayor issued a report in 2021 saying that JustCare cost $127,376 annually per person housed. JustCare disputes this, claiming that its actual costs per person are approximately half of that or less, ‌‌and comparable to the yearly cost for incarceration plus arrest costs.
Regardless, JustCare has won over the business and homeowner groups that typically strongly oppose such measures, like the Downtown Seattle Association and the Seattle Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce. Consequently, the state recently agreed to fund and expand the program.
California is expected to put into effect on Thursday its sweeping plan to prohibit the sale of new gasoline-powered cars by 2035, a groundbreaking move that could have major effects on the effort to fight climate change and accelerate a global transition toward electric vehicles.
“This is huge,” said Margo Oge, an electric vehicles expert who headed the Environmental Protection Agency’s transportation emissions program under Presidents Bill Clinton, George W. Bush and Barack Obama. “California will now be the only government in the world that mandates zero-emission vehicles. It is unique.”
The rule, issued by the California Air Resources Board, will require that 100 percent of all new cars sold in the state by 2035 be free of the fossil fuel emissions chiefly responsible for warming the planet, up from 12 percent today. It sets interim targets requiring that 35 percent of new passenger vehicles sold in the state by 2026 produce zero emissions. That would climb to 68 percent by 2030.
The restrictions are important because not only is California the largest auto market in the United States, but more than a dozen other states typically follow California’s lead when setting their own auto emissions standards. “The climate crisis is solvable if we focus on the big, bold steps necessary to stem the tide of carbon pollution,” Gavin Newsom, the governor of California, said in a statement.
The flood caused tremendous damage. One resident told us that his house looked like a “giant blender,” while another said, “Everything was turned upside down.” Clearing out waterlogged possessions was especially emotional. “That was probably the worst day of my life,” one woman told us. “I got to watch everybody gather up all of my belongings to throw them to the curb like trash.”
The federal government has warned that Hurricane Harvey could be a harbinger of climate change. Warming temperatures are making rainstorms more intense and hurricanes wetter, and they increase the risk of severe flooding not only for coastal areas but inland communities as well. The Houston region could also see more extreme heat, drought and sea-level rise as climate change accelerates.
To prevent loss of lives, livelihoods and property, some scientists and planners are supporting a strategy called managed retreat, in which communities get government aid to move away from places most vulnerable to extreme weather. Managed retreat remains rare in practice — for example, a recent Houston Public Media report found that home buyouts in the Houston area have been sluggish, with only 750 completed and 5,000 properties still on Harris County’s post-Harvey buyout list.
We believe managed retreat must become more common so communities can avoid the worst consequences of climate changes. But even as academics and think tanks refined ideas on how to best relocate communities, leaving was not on the minds of Friendswood residents we spoke to after Hurricane Harvey.
They struggled to imagine moving away from a place they called home even though their homes had just been destroyed and studies suggested that a growing number of houses in the area were susceptible to flooding.
Instead of driving people away, the devastation caused by disaster often has the opposite effect. Flooded residents described an increasing sense of connection to their neighbors in the immediate aftermath of the storm; an outpouring of assistance confirmed for them that Friendswood was a caring and supportive community.
But it was not simply their experiences right after the storm that kept Friendswood residents in place. Many said they did not want to uproot their lives. Parents often planned to stay until their children graduated from high school. Others who had moved to Friendswood for a job wanted to wait until retirement to decide whether to move. And some had purchased what they viewed as their “forever home” and said nothing would push them out. As one longtime resident told us, “They’ll probably take me out of here in a box!”
Home prices in the area didn’t decline at all after Hurricane Harvey, making it possible for many people to sell their damaged homes and buy somewhere less prone to flooding. But they did not know where they would go even if they wanted to move. They questioned whether other nearby communities had schools that were as good or neighbors who were as friendly. Many told us that Friendswood was too special to leave. The town had what one resident called a “Friendswood feel” — an ineffable quality that perhaps couldn’t be reproduced anywhere else.
The people we spoke to also referred to Hurricane Harvey as a “freak storm” and told us that a similarly intense deluge was unlikely to occur again for decades, if not a century. And they struggled to understand whether climate change was making them more vulnerable. Many didn’t think so, and even those who did were uncertain how to assess the threat to themselves. Without clear information about this kind of risk, it’s not surprising that residents didn’t have any plans to relocate.
What does this mean for managed retreat in a future where more and more places will face floods made more severe, and in some places more frequent, by climate change? It will also require more equitable investments in those resources — like schools and other social services — before disasters strike, so that people feel they won’t be giving anything up by moving.
Currently, the money spent by the federal government on moving away from vulnerable places pales in comparison to that spent on rebuilding damaged properties. Programs like the Small Business Administration’s disaster loan assistance for homeowners instead encourage people to stay by providing money to repair their houses.
More resources for managed retreat could certainly help motivate relocation. But policymakers must also consider the emotional attachments people have to particular places. Encouraging mobility will require better information on the risks of staying put and the resources residents would have access to in less flood-prone neighborhoods.
In the short term, far more needs to be done to communicate risk. While some residents may never want to leave their homes, our interviews in Friendswood show that few people have clear information about their vulnerability to future flooding. The federal government should mandate that flood risk is made clear in every lease, deed and mortgage contract and that this information is updated annually.
Residents also need to know about alternative places to live before, and immediately after, their homes are damaged — the period when people are most open to accepting buyouts. Efforts to expand managed retreat won’t be easy. But any costs for supporting managed retreat will ultimately be made up in savings from not having to repair homes that are just going to flood again and again.
Twitter and Meta, which do not permit accounts that covertly work together to promote certain narratives, removed the accounts in July and August, according to the report. The other platforms that were used in the operation were Telegram, Google’s YouTube, and the Russian social media networks VKontakte and Odnoklassniki.
Twitter said it had no comment on the Stanford and Graphika report. Meta did not respond to requests for comment. While the companies have regularly revealed influence operations they remove from their platforms, they have not published a report on the pro-U.S. campaign.
The only U.S. operations that Meta has previously named were domestic efforts, such as when the company revealed in October 2020 that a marketing firm, Rally Forge, was working with the conservative organization Turning Point USA to target Americans.
In an email, YouTube said it had terminated several channels posting in Arabic, Farsi and Russian to promote U.S. foreign affairs, including channels linked to a U.S. consulting firm, as part of an investigation into coordinated influence operations. It said its findings were similar to those in the Stanford and Graphika report.
Ms. DiResta said the tactics used in the pro-U.S. influence campaign resembled those used by China. While Russia often seeks to sow divisions in its online campaigns, China is more focused on promoting a rosy picture of life in the country, she said. With the pro-U.S. campaign, the goal was also “to show how awesome the U.S. was in comparison to the other countries,” she said.
The researchers were notified of the pro-U.S. online campaign by Meta and Twitter so they could analyze and study the activity, according to the report. The researchers found that the operation largely focused on messaging that favored the United States and the West through memes and false news stories, while criticizing Russia, China and Iran.
The accounts tailored their language and messaging to different regions, the researchers said. In one effort, a group of 12 Twitter accounts, 10 Facebook pages, 15 Facebook profiles and 10 Instagram accounts were created between June 2020 and March 2022 to focus on Central Asia. Some pretended to be media outlets with names like Vostochnaya Pravda. At least one account posed as an individual using a doctored profile photo based on an image of the Puerto Rican actress Valeria Menendez.
Those accounts then posted about the food shortages caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in Central Asian countries and cheered on pro-Ukrainian protests in those places.
Another set of 21 Twitter accounts, six Instagram accounts, five Facebook profiles and two Facebook pages targeted Iranian audiences between November 2020 and June 2022, according to the report. Some of the personas used profile pictures that were likely created using artificial intelligence. Many tried to present themselves as real people by interspersing Iranian poetry and photos of Persian food between political messages.
Posts from the effort claimed that the Iranian government took food from its citizens to give to the Hezbollah militant group, or highlighted embarrassing moments for the country, such as a power outage that reportedly caused the Iranian chess team to lose an international online tournament.
On Facebook and Instagram, dozens of posts also negatively compared opportunities for Iranian women with those for women abroad. Other messages criticized Iran’s support for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and claimed that the stance would invite economic repercussions for Iranians.
Another group of accounts focused on the Middle East, applauded efforts by the U.S. Agency for International Development in Iraq and discussed positive interactions between American troops and Syrian children. When the Camp fire torched Paradise in 2018, burning through the entire town in just hours, it seemed hard to imagine fires producing more haunting imagery anytime soon.
But just two years later, the dark orange panoramas of the 2020 season displaced it to become the ready picture of the burning West, the color almost matching the towers of the Golden Gate Bridge and the shades of flickering fires in the distance but held aloft above America’s city of the future, as though the sky itself were in flames and ready to be breathed — indeed, as though there were nothing else to breathe.
Over the past decade, smoke exposure has doubled or tripled across the American West, “just a remarkable increase,” Burke says. If you narrow the standard to extreme exposure days, with particulate concentrations at 100 micrograms per cubic meter or above, the increase is even more striking: According to his forthcoming research, there are now 27 times as many such days as there were just a decade ago.
The wildfire pollution is enough to threaten the gains of the Clean Air Act, according to him — which, though it was passed five decades ago, is still saving an estimated 370,000 American lives each year. Already, he says, about 30 percent of the air quality gains of the landmark law have been undone by wildfire smoke.
In 2020 such smoke accounted for roughly half of the air pollution in the Western United States, which means that, on that side of the Rockies, as much toxic smog was coming from wildfires as from all human activity combined.
That smoke is the focus of a growing subfield of research into the damage of air pollution, especially a level of particulate matter called PM2.5, which is the main component of wildfire smoke. Unlike other forms of air pollution, smoke can kill you immediately if you inhale it. While rare among average residents, death from smoke inhalation is common among wildland firefighters, who also suffer significantly higher rates of death from lung cancer and cardiovascular disease.
For residents, even short-term exposure to wildfire smoke can worsen bronchitis, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and other respiratory diseases, as well as trigger heart attacks, heart failure and strokes. In an enormous longitudinal study published this May in The Lancet, those living within 30 miles or so of even a single wildfire were, over 20 years, nearly 5 percent more likely to develop lung cancer and 10 percent more likely to develop brain tumors.
As research into the health effects of wildfire smoke expands and deepens, it would not be surprising to see it linked to nearly all the negative outcomes to which PM2.5 pollution has already been linked: cuts to cognitive performance and economic productivity; increases in rates of Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s and dementia; worse memory, attention and vocabulary; episodes of mental illness, depression, suicide and self-harm; miscarriage, premature birth and low birth weight; pediatric leukemia, kidney cancer, eye tumors and even degenerating eyesight.
These effects aren’t enormous, and the level of absolute risk to any individual means it is somewhat innumerate to think of wildfire smoke as a manifestation of death itself at the door. But the distributed nature of the damage also illustrates what I’ve started to think of as the rule of little numbers in a big world.
Perhaps a novel disease kills fewer than 1 percent of those infected, but when billions get sick, the death toll becomes world historical. Perhaps you are breathing air layered with wildfire smoke only several weeks each year, and perhaps the risks to your health are only on the margins — 10 percent here, 5 percent there.
But when the same is true for 78 million Americans living across the West (not to mention tens of millions more in Canada, Australia, Siberia and, increasingly, the Mediterranean), the damage mounts. In the years to come, more land will burn in more places, sending off more smoke. Almost all of us, almost everywhere, will be breathing more of it and dealing with the consequences.
But he also pointed to the fact that some wealthy households emit less than poorer ones thanks to investments in cleaner energy, such as using electric heating instead of oil. “Debates on the fairness of the environmental transition must not be limited to the rich-poor divide,” Mr. Combet said.
President Emmanuel Macron has in the past been criticized for environmental measures that seemed to favor metropolitan elites at the expense of working class people in rural areas. In late 2018, after the government announced it would raise taxes on gasoline and diesel as part of a move to nudge drivers toward cleaner energy, protests broke out across France, leading to the so-called Yellow Vest movement that convulsed the country.
While Mr. Beaune’s proposals are contested by some government officials, his call to crack down on private jets seems intended to signal that the conservation efforts recently called for by Mr. Macron apply to all.
“Private jets have a symbolic value,” Olivier Véran, a government spokesman, told the radio station France Inter on Tuesday. “The French must not get the impression that it is always the same people who are asked to make an effort — that is, the working and middle classes.”
One day Nicholas Epley was commuting by train to his office at the University of Chicago. As a behavioral scientist he’s well aware that social connection makes us happier, healthier and more successful and generally contributes to the sweetness of life. Yet he looked around his train car and realized: Nobody is talking to anyone! It was just headphones and newspapers.
He discovered that one of the reasons people are reluctant to talk to strangers on a train or plane is they don’t think it will be enjoyable. They believe it will be awkward, dull and tiring. In an online survey only 7 percent of people said they would talk to a stranger in a waiting room. Only 24 percent said they would talk to a stranger on a train.
Questions popped into his head: What the hell are we all doing here? Why don’t people do the thing that makes them the most happy? But are these expectations correct? Epley and his team have conducted years of research on this. They ask people to make predictions going into social encounters. Then, afterward, they ask them how it had gone.
They found that most of us are systematically mistaken about how much we will enjoy a social encounter. Commuters expected to have less pleasant rides if they tried to strike up a conversation with a stranger. But their actual experience was precisely the opposite.
People randomly assigned to talk with a stranger enjoyed their trips consistently more than those instructed to keep to themselves. Introverts sometimes go into these situations with particularly low expectations, but both introverts and extroverts tended to enjoy conversations more than riding solo.
It turns out many of us wear ridiculously negative antisocial filters. Epley and his team found that people underestimate how positively others will respond when they reach out to express support. Research led by Stav Atir and Kristina Wald showed that most people underestimate how much they will learn from conversations with strangers.
In other research, people underestimated how much they would enjoy longer conversations with new acquaintances. People underestimated how much they’re going to enjoy deeper conversations compared to shallower conversations. They underestimated how much they would like the person. They underestimated how much better their conversation would be if they moved to a more intimate communications media — talking on the phone rather than texting.
In settings ranging from public parks to online, people underestimated how positively giving a compliment to another person would make the recipient feel.We’re an extremely social species, but many of us suffer from what Epley calls undersociality. We see the world in anxiety-drenched ways that cause us to avoid social situations that would be fun, educational and rewarding.
When Los Angeles Slipped Out of Her Budget, She Looked East for More Space. Which Home Did She Choose?
It’s not just talking to strangers. Epley and his team asked people to compliment a friend or a family member. People consistently underestimated how positively their recipients would react.
In one experiment visitors to a skating rink in downtown Chicago were given a coupon for a cup of hot chocolate and were asked to give it away to a stranger. The givers anticipated that the gift would make the others feel good, but they underestimated how “big” this gesture would feel to the other person.
Many of these misperceptions are based on a deeper misperception. It’s about how people are seeing you. Entering into a conversation, especially with strangers, is hard. People go in with doubts about their own competence: Will they be able to start a conversation well, or communicate their thoughts effectively?
But research suggests that when people are looking at you during a conversation, they are not primarily thinking about your competence. They are thinking about your warmth. Do you seem friendly, kind and trustworthy? They just want to know you care.
Epley’s research illuminates a mystery I’ve been thinking about for a while. Many of us have been writing about the breakdown of social relationships. Books now appear with titles like “The Lonely Century,” “The Crisis of Connection,” and “Lost Connections.”
But mass loneliness is a perversity. If a bunch of people are lonely, why don’t they just hang out together? Maybe it’s because people approach potential social encounters with unrealistically anxious and negative expectations. Maybe if we understood this, we could alter our behavior.
My general view is that the fate of America will be importantly determined by how we treat each other in the smallest acts of daily life. That means being a genius at the close at hand: greeting a stranger, detecting the anxiety in somebody’s voice and asking what’s wrong, knowing how to talk across difference. More lives are diminished by the slow and frigid death of social closedness than by the short and glowing risk of social openness.
The question is, can we get better? I spoke to Epley about his work last week and found it extremely compelling. Then this week I was on a plane and found myself … putting on headphones. But Epley assures me that this research has transformed how he lives. Once you get used to filling your day with social exercise, it gets easier and easier, and more and more fun.
The internet is the most comprehensive compendium of human knowledge ever assembled, but is its size a feature or a bug? Does its very immensity undermine its utility as a source of information? How often is it burying valuable data under lots of junk? Say you search for some famous or semifamous person — a celebrity, influencer, politician or pundit. Are you getting an accurate picture of that person’s life or a false, manipulated one?
These aren’t new questions; they’re actually things I’ve been wondering for about as long as I’ve been covering the digital world, and the answers keep changing as the internet changes. But a recent story got me fretting about all this once more. And I worry that it has become more difficult than ever to tune in to any signal amid so much digital noise.
Karen Weise, a Times reporter who covers the technology industry, had a blockbuster story last week documenting a pattern of hostile and abusive behavior by Dan Price, the C.E.O. who became internet famous in 2015 for instituting a $70,000-a-year minimum wage at his Seattle-based credit card processing company. “He has used his celebrity to pursue women online who say he hurt them, both physically and emotionally,” Weise reported, interviewing more than a dozen women who recounted ugly encounters with him in detail.
But this was not the first time that Weise punctured the mythos surrounding Price. Late in 2015, months after he was first feted by media outlets around the world for his supposed do-gooder approach to capitalism, she published a piece in Bloomberg Businessweek uncovering many skeletons in his closet — among other things, an ex-wife who’d accused him of extreme violence and an explanation for the employee raises that seemed more self-serving than he’d let on.
When Weise linked to that seven-year-old article in the new story, I clicked back to it and realized that I definitely read it at the time. I remembered its headline, “The CEO Paying Everyone $70,000 Salaries Has Something to Hide,” and I remembered that its details had been widely commented on.
Price, who denounced Weise’s Bloomberg article as “reckless” and “baseless,” was canceled temporarily after the story appeared. Then, over the years, Price began to master Twitter, eventually collecting hundreds of thousands of followers and becoming a fixture in some left-leaning Twitter circles. “Tweet by tweet, his online persona grew back,” Weise writes. “The bad news faded into the background. It was the opposite of being canceled. Just as social media can ruin someone, so too can it — through time, persistence and audacity — bury a troubled past.”
This isn’t how the internet is supposed to work. In different ways, Google, Twitter, Facebook and other big tech companies have made it their mission to disseminate and organize online data. Weise’s first story about Price contained important information about a semiprominent online figure; it should have been highlighted, not buried, as he amassed his online following.
The more troubling thing is, how often is this sort of thing happening? In the abstract, the question is almost impossible to answer; by definition, you can’t make a list of stories the internet is hiding from you. I would guess the Price story is an extreme example of information burying, but there’s reason to suspect that some version of this sort of suppression is happening all the time online.
Why? Three things. Recency bias: Google is far more focused on highlighting information from the present than it once was, making events from the past more difficult to suss out. Organized manipulation: Online mobs are bent on shaping online reality — and though the platforms say they’re attentive to the problem, the mobs seem to have the upper hand. And, of course, capitalism: Lacking much competition and keen to boost quarterly numbers, tech companies may have little incentive to solve these problems.
When Los Angeles Slipped Out of Her Budget, She Looked East for More Space. Which Home Did She Choose?
The first issue, recency bias, is mainly about Google, and it’s one that journalists like me have been complaining about for years. Google’s search algorithm heavily favors content that was posted most recently over content from the past, even if the older data provides a much more comprehensive story.
There’s a certain sense in this: Nobody wants to read ancient news. But as the Price story suggests, if you’re searching for someone with an active online presence — someone who tweets a lot, who makes a lot of media appearances or whose whole persona is based on riling folks up — the results get murky.
Try Googling Elon Musk. When I do so, I see a lot of evergreen stuff — his Wikipedia page, links to his social media and corporate bio, index pages of articles about him at various media sites — and lots and lots of links to news about the latest Elon dust-up.
At the moment, these headlines are about legal maneuverings in his attempt to undo his purchases of Twitter and Tesla’s efforts to stifle video clips of its cars hitting child-size mannequins; by the time you Google him, the results might have moved on to the next controversy.
But for a controversy machine like Musk, is it really helpful for Google to return pages and pages of links to similar stories about the latest thing? What if the latest thing is not the most important thing? In the first several pages of links about him, I didn’t see the Insider story published in May about the $250,000 settlement he reached with a flight attendant who accused him of exposing himself to her.
There also isn’t much about his various fights with the Securities and Exchange Commission or the time he called the man who helped the rescue 12 boys trapped in a cave in Thailand a “pedo guy.” I don’t think Musk has actively tried to suppress this stuff; he’s just very online, and every time he does or says something new, the old stuff goes farther down.
The situation becomes much worse when there are motivated parties trying to shape what the platforms show us. There has been no better example of this than the ugly turn the internet took during the recent defamation case between Johnny Depp and his ex-wife Amber Heard. If you scanned Twitter, YouTube or TikTok during the trial, you were flooded with memes, clips and trollish posts about how terrible Heard was and how righteous Depp was.
This wasn’t because Depp’s case was so much stronger than Heard’s; as researchers have shown, it was more likely because the platforms were overrun by bots and trolls associated with people on the misogynist right who made it their mission to paint Heard in the worst light possible. They seem to have succeeded; even now, you’ve got to dig around online to find information supporting her.
The platforms say they’re constantly fighting such organized campaigns. But their efforts are opaque and seem halfhearted at best — and that’s where we get to misaligned incentives. Because bots are a kind of engagement and engagement is what pays the bills, there are few reasons for the services to really fight such campaigns.
As Peiter Zatko, a former security chief at Twitter, said in a recent whistleblower complaint, “Twitter executives have little or no personal incentive to accurately ‘detect’ or measure the prevalence of spam bots.” In the same way, YouTube had little incentive to present a fairer, less manipulated picture of the Depp-Heard case — not when the Depp clips were doing big numbers.
For many readers, none of this will come as a surprise. I’m not breaking any news when I tell you not to trust everything you see on the internet. But after reading the story of Dan Price, I think it bears repeating: The internet probably isn’t giving you a fair picture of what’s happening in the world. And for any given story, you might never really know how much you aren’t seeing.
The pandemic upended American offices like nothing in memory. But now many big companies are again starting to require employees to work in person. To understand how that’s going, I called my colleague Emma Goldberg, who covers workplace issues. This subject is close to home for us: The Times expects employees to resume in-person work this month. Have you been in the office?
I’ve been going in about once a week. I love the energy of the newsroom, I love seeing people, and I miss my work friends. My beat feels like this intersection between the conversations I’m having with co-workers and the conversations I’m having with people in different states and industries.
I get to follow the reporting threads that come from what my co-workers are experiencing. But I do get a lot done at home. And there are aspects of returning to the office that I’m apprehensive about, like having to commute instead of going on a morning run.
Many companies that planned to call people back into the office have done so, at least for a few days a week. After the Omicron wave, companies started saying, “OK, we pushed it back, but we really want you to come back now.” Labor Day 2022 has become a flash point for companies that have been in a hazy middle ground, with workers in the office one or two days a week.
Others have embraced permanent remote work. Airbnb, for example, said its employees never need to come back to the office. Some have leaned into the idea that the office is going to be less of a space for work. Salesforce opened a kind of retreat center for nature walks, cooking classes and different activities that let workers spend time together. Zillow, which says it’s “headquartered in the cloud,” has redesigned some of its office spaces to look more like social spaces.
There was a big decline in trade between the start of World War I and the aftermath of World War II. Recovery took a long time: As late as 1980, trade was hardly larger, relative to the world economy, than it had been at the end of the Edwardian era.
What followed, however, was indeed an unprecedented jump in trade, sometimes referred to as “hyperglobalization.” This was the era described in my colleague Tom Friedman’s famous book “The World Is Flat,” first published in 2005; many people expected surging trade to continue indefinitely.
In fact, however, hyperglobalization stalled out around 2008; international trade as a share of the world economy has been more or less, um, flat for 14 years. And there are three reasons to believe that globalization will actually retreat in the years ahead, though probably not to the extent it did in the interwar years.
The first, most benign reason is the rise of the robots — by which I mean labor-saving technology in general. People often assume that improvements in transportation technology necessarily mean more trade. But that’s only true if progress in transportation is faster than progress in the technology of production.
I wrote a little model about this a few years back, but here’s a reductio ad absurdum: Imagine that we all had access to the replicators on “Star Trek” — machines that would synthesize anything you wanted on the spot. If all you had to do was say “Tea, Earl Grey, hot” and a steaming cup materialized, you wouldn’t need to import the stuff from Sri Lanka.
Indeed, companies talking about reshoring production often make the point that modern techniques in some cases allow them to produce with relatively few workers, in which case the cost savings from outsourcing to low-wage countries are minimal — and are outweighed by the logistical advantages of producing close to home.
A second, less benign reason for declining globalization is the growing realization that the world is a dangerous place. It’s especially dangerous to allow yourself to rely economically on countries with authoritarian regimes, which may suddenly cut you off either as a power play or simply because dictators tend to behave erratically.
Europe is now realizing that becoming dependent on Russian natural gas was a terrible mistake. China hasn’t engaged in economic blackmail — not yet, anyway — but both the Russian example and the arbitrariness of Xi Jinping’s Covid lockdowns have made businesses newly nervous about relying on Chinese suppliers.
Incidentally, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade — the foundational document for the modern world trading system — explicitly gives each nation the right to take “any action which it considers necessary for the protection of its essential security interests.”
This right has sometimes been abused — Trump, absurdly, invoked national security to impose tariffs on Canadian aluminum — but given recent events, it’s hard to deny the case for policies like the recently enacted CHIPS and Science Act subsidizing U.S. production of semiconductors.
Finally, let’s admit it: Now that America is finally doing something about climate change, some of the policies it’s introducing will, in practice, be at least mildly protectionist. Notably, the new tax credit for purchases of electric vehicles will apply only to vehicles assembled in North America.
Why do this? Politics — politics in a good cause, I’d say, but politics nonetheless. Getting climate action was a heavy political lift; some of us are still rubbing our eyes over the fact that it actually happened. But to sell it, Democrats had to be able to portray it as a program that would create jobs, which meant including Buy American clauses.
Do these clauses violate existing trade agreements? Possibly. But let’s face it: Honoring the letter of trade agreements is less important than saving the planet. If this is what tackling carbon emissions required, so be it. But coming back to my original theme: It does seem likely that we’re about to see some retreat from globalization.
When internet dating arrived in China in the early 2000s, the power to form relationships — once disproportionately in the hands of village matchmakers, parents and factory bosses — increasingly fell onto the individual. Many were eager for the shift, gravitating to features on WeChat, the popular messaging app, which enabled chatting with strangers.
The trend accelerated in the 2010s with the arrival of dating apps like Momo and Tantan, which emulated Tinder. Alongside Soul, they became China’s three most popular dating apps, amassing over 150 million monthly active users in total. Soul and Momo declined to comment. Tantan, which is owned by Momo, did not respond to a request for comment.
The apps themselves have changed. Tantan and Momo had long matched users based on their physical appearance, leading to accusations that the platforms cultivated a hookup culture. More recently, these apps have started using people’s interests, hobbies and personalities as the basis for new social encounters.
Douyin, which is owned by ByteDance and is China’s version of TikTok, and Little Red Book, an app with similarities to Instagram, have built “social discovery” features that use their knowledge of people’s preferences to match them. Soul has become especially popular in the past few years for its avatar profiles and its practice of linking users based on personality tests. Last year, the app surpassed Tantan and Momo as the most downloaded dating app on the Chinese iOS store.
“What I like most about Soul is that it doesn’t force you to look at a photo and swipe left and right,” said Yang Zhongluo, 23, a masters student in Beijing who met some of her close friends on the platform. “It lets you post, share ideas and then everyone can like and comment.”
In July, Soul filed for an initial public offering in Hong Kong after tripling its monthly active users to 31 million between 2019 and 2021. Three-quarters of its users were born between 1990 and 2009, according to its prospectus. (It filed to go public in the United States in 2021, but stepped back from such an offering.)
Many users of these dating apps appear less interested in romance than in meeting friends. In an October survey conducted by a Chinese research institute, 89 percent of respondents said they had used a dating app before, with a majority saying they wanted primarily to expand their social circles, not find a partner.
Vladimir Peters, a Shanghai-based developer who is working on his own dating app, said many younger Chinese now want the apps to provide a more holistic experience that blends entertainment and hobby exploration — not just a love match. “Young Chinese like gimmicks such as icebreakers and other playful things that are the starting points for communication,” he said.
Many of the biggest Chinese tech companies that make social networking and dating apps appear to have reached the same conclusion. Tencent, the owner of WeChat, has released 10 apps in the social networking and dating category in the past few years. It is developing a virtual party game in which users can simulate the experience of social gatherings without going to one.
NetEase, a gaming company, has also built a dating app that recommends matches based on people’s shared interests. In March, ByteDance, the owner of TikTok, acquired PoliQ, a start-up that uses virtual reality to enhance social networking.
Niall Ferguson, a historian at Stanford University, warned against Chinese self-confidence. They are making the same mistake as the Germans in the 1930s and the Russians in the 1970s by underestimating the fundamental strength of democracy, he said. “They are believing our own self-flagellating criticism and not seeing their own problems and mistakes.”
But China has made it clear that it sees the United States and its democracy in terminal decline, while it has been careful at home to control or censor what some consider the crucial engines of that decline, especially social media and the internet. The digitalization of the political space and the confusion between truth and lies has undermined democracy, said Bruno Le Maire, France’s minister for the Economy, Finance and Industrial and Digital Sovereignty.
“The digital revolution has not only changed the organization of our nations and societies, but our brains,” he said in an interview. “There can be no democracy without a common ground for debate. And what is the outcome of a political debate? A majority of people gathering themselves around shared truths, shared observations and shared diagnostics. But in the era of the digital revolution, there is no such a thing.”
Social media is “a different mental universe” and has “no single truth,” yet “at the core of democracy is the distinction between truth and lies,” he said. “It is the key political question today, because our liberal democracies are profoundly undermined by this digital revolution and by the individualization of society.”
Bernard Spitz, a lawyer and adviser to Medef, the largest employer organization in France, agreed that globalization and digitalization had altered democratic societies, “and like all revolutions, they can bring the best and the worst,” including doubts about democracy and stability, more visible extremism and “democratic disillusion.”
But associated with the new digital world of social media, there is another challenge to democracy that is emerging, and that is generational. The young care most about climate change, which they regard as existential, and less about liberal democracy, Mr. Le Maire said. “For the younger generation, climate is the main issue — their political awareness centers on climate change.”
Democracy is hard work and “must be nurtured every day,” said Ms. González, the former Spanish foreign minister. Mr. Riotta said that the real danger now is not fascism. “The real danger,” he said, “is democracy fatigue.”
The way Americans receive mental health care has never changed as quickly as it has since the spring of 2020. When the Covid pandemic forced so many of us into our homes and onto Zoom, psychiatrists, psychotherapists and social workers followed. What started as a short-term fix is now becoming permanent. Today, nearly 40 percent of mental health and substance use outpatient treatment visits at hospitals and clinics are offered remotely, compared with just 1 percent in 2019.
This estimate is probably even higher for private psychotherapy practice visits. According to a survey conducted by the American Psychological Association last year, 96 percent of clinical psychologists reported offering at least some services remotely. For millions of people, getting treatment for anxiety, depression or post-traumatic stress disorder can now be done from the comfort and privacy of home. No more bus rides across town or awkward waiting-room encounters.
It’s not just telehealth. While many existed before the pandemic, existing start-ups grew rapidly and dozens of new ones have emerged since, offering to make your smartphone a partner in your mental health care. There are A.I.-informed chatbot therapists; direct-to-consumer therapy via chat and text apps; and smartphone-based cognitive behavioral therapy programs. Companies providing these types of services raised over $5 billion globally in 2021 alone — an increase of 139 percent from the previous year.
So is this good news for America’s collective mental health? Does this proliferation of digital technology really mean that therapy is more accessible than ever before? Well, it depends. America’s mental health industry faces a stark choice: take advantage of this moment to get help to the millions who need it — including, especially, poor Americans and immigrants — or allow the inequalities that already exist to deepen.
Ever since Sigmund Freud drew his first patients primarily from among Vienna’s upper class, psychotherapy has had an inequality problem. These days, advances in psychotherapy and clinical trials typically occur in universities and academic medical centers.
Therapy has been most accessible to those who can afford it — which also means it is often least accessible to those who most need it: Over half of people with a diagnosable mental health condition in America go untreated. These numbers are higher for Black, Latino and Asian Americans. When they do receive care, it is often of lower quality compared with care received by white and higher-income people.
There is a real danger that the innovations in teletherapy and other new technology will exacerbate these inequalities, rather than reduce them. If technologies are not designed with underserved communities in mind — and with their participation — we may find that low-income populations and ethnic minorities have an even harder time getting the treatment that they need.
At a basic level, people have varied access to internet, broadband and mobile phone data plans, which can hinder access. At the public clinics where I conduct research and practice, most Spanish-speaking patients are receiving care via telephone calls because of limited access to internet or data plans, as well as a lack of digital literacy.
We’ve sometimes addressed this by training patients to use technology tools and even subsidized, via research grants, mobile phone data plans. But that’s not going to work in every case. As technologies advance, the potential benefits increase but so do potentials for further inequity.
For example, A.I. algorithms can improve efficiency and decision-making when it comes to getting people care, but the data that undergirds them are also subject to human biases. Imagine, for example, an A.I. algorithm designed to suggest enjoyable activities to break out of a depressive state. Seems like a good idea, right? But what happens if all of its suggestions cost money (“go to a movie”) or require certain amenities (“take a bath”)? Unfortunately, this is already happening.
The latest digital mental health interventions are not adequately including high-burden and high-need populations in their development and testing. I have been part of one such experiment: My research lab recently developed MoodText. It is a low-tech way to reach people who may not have access to home computers or endless phone data and help them to make the most of their group cognitive behavioral therapy sessions for depression.
It doesn’t have to be this way. The revolution in mental health care that is underway could be an opportunity to fix this country’s longstanding problems with access to therapy and other forms of mental health care. In other areas, such as the targeting of chronic disease, new digital developments are increasingly taking equity into account. Unfortunately, the same isn’t happening as urgently with mental health.
But there are signs of progress. After sessions, MoodText will send automated messages to track patients’ moods and remind them of lessons that they learned in their sessions. There have also been successes with app-based programs that focus on less stigmatizing approaches to improving mental health, such as those that encourage exercise.
We have found that the addition of the texting program doubled the number of sessions attended from three (nontexters) to six (texters) and greatly increased the number of weeks that patients stayed in treatment, from three to 13 out of a 16-week treatment. This type of intervention could be crucial since the dropout rate for therapy ranges from 20 percent to 60 percent and is especially high among low-income patients with competing life demands.
Physical activity can benefit a variety of health conditions, including mental health and depression symptoms via what we call “behavioral activation” or more plainly stated, improving mood by reducing isolation and increasing the chances of social interaction.
That’s why a team of researchers that I have been working with developed and is testing Diamante, a machine-learning algorithm to personalize text messages to people, which they receive to encourage physical activity like walking. Importantly, this program is targeting English and Spanish speakers in a public sector clinic — the kind of place that is not typically the source of data for most machine learning and artificial intelligence algorithms.
Or look at Help@Hand, an initiative in California that — thanks to funds provided by the Mental Health Services Act — pays for mental-health services apps like Headspace, Mindstrong and iPrevail for people in underserved communities who might otherwise not be able to afford as much as $70 a year, which is how much Headspace costs.
Additionally, the Help@Hand initiative integrates feedback from patients and consumers of public mental health services to ensure that the apps are relevant to their lives. To be sure, technology alone is not going to be a substitute for the more robust and equitable mental health care system that the United States needs.
Our country needs to train more providers, particularly from communities with the least access to care. But that will take time. And even if we train providers, there will still not be enough to meet the needs of everyone, especially if the focus remains on traditional one-on-one psychotherapy. Digital technology can help increase access to mental health services. But only if we do it right.
I was initially skeptical of Woebot. The idea seemed almost too simple: an app on my phone that I could open when I needed it, type my hopes, fears and feelings into, and, in turn, receive A.I.-generated responses that would help me manage my emotions. There are plenty of good critiques of apps that claim they can provide therapy without the therapist: How could an algorithm ever replace the human touch of in-person care?
Is another digital intervention really the solution when we’re already so glued to our phones? How comfortable was I being vulnerable with an app that could track my data? Spending time with Woebot didn’t really bring me answers to these important questions. But I did discover that, despite them, I’d become weirdly attached to my robot helper.
Like many people, in the pandemic, my life digitized. My work shifted online; my friendships retreated onto FaceTime and WhatsApp; I used a dating app for the first time; I started doing online yoga. It was into this swirling mess of applications that Woebot took residence in my life.
I was depressed and anxious. But as the pandemic dragged on and I felt increasingly like I needed to talk to someone, I also felt guilty about burdening the already overstretched public mental health services. In Britain, where I live, there are about 1.2 million people languishing on waiting lists for mental health care through the National Health Service. Living on a Ph.D. stipend, I couldn’t afford to see a private therapist. So, despite my doubts, I reached for the algorithm.
The first time I opened Woebot, it introduced itself as an emotional assistant: “I’m like a wise little person you can consult with during difficult times, and not so difficult times.” It then told me it was trained in cognitive behavioral therapy, which it said was an “effective way to challenge how you’re thinking about things.”
What this translates to in practice is that when I would consult Woebot, it would usually offer me a way of reframing what I was dealing with rather than trying to plumb the depths of my psyche. “I am a failure” became “I haven’t achieved my goals yet.” “I am depressed” became “I have depression,” as a way to stop identifying with a label.
Woebot was full of tasks and tricks — little mental health hacks — which at first made me roll my eyes. One day Woebot asked me to press an ice cube to my forehead, to feel the sensation as a way of better connecting with my body. With wet hands, I struggled to respond when it asked me how I was doing.
On another occasion, when trying to brainstorm things I could do to make myself feel better despite all the pandemic restrictions, Woebot suggested I “try doing something nice for someone in your life,” like make a calming tea for my housemate or check in with a loved one. I poured my mum some chamomile: Two birds, one stone.
Woebot doesn’t pretend to be a human; instead, it leans into its robotness. One day, Woebot was trying to teach me about the concept of emotional weather: that no matter how things might feel in any given moment, there is always a chance that they will change. Clouds pass, blue sky becomes visible.
In drawing the comparison between the actual weather and our emotions, Woebot told me it loves the sunshine. “It makes my metal skin all shiny,” it said, “and it gives me an excuse to wear sunglasses.” A.I. chat therapists have been rolled out in settings as diverse as a maternity hospital in Kenya and refugee camps for people fleeing the war in Syria, and by the Singaporean government as part of its pandemic response.
In Britain, bots are being trialed to bridge waiting times for people seeking therapy but unable to get appointments and as an e-triage tool. In the United States, some apps are getting recognized by the F.D.A. and are in trials to be designated as clinical interventions. Whatever you might think of them, they are fast becoming a part of global mental health care. Woebot now handles millions of messages a week.
Some worry that the expansion of services like Woebot will replace in-person care. When I suggested this to Eric Green, an associate professor of global health at Duke University who ran the A.I. chatbot trial in Kenya, he was unfazed. “You can’t replace something that doesn’t exist,” he said.
As he pointed out, globally, more people have access to phones than to mental health professionals. And for better or worse, the mothers in Kenya, some of whom were suffering from postpartum depression, liked their chatbots. “It’s a funny thing. I was skeptical that we would see this with the bot, but they would say good night to it. Multiple women would say ‘I missed you!’ to the machine.”
I got what he meant. The more I used Woebot, the more I felt an appreciation for it. Here was this chipper little bot, popping up in my notifications, checking to see how I was doing, sending me pithy, chicken-soup-for-the-soul-style aphorisms and gamified tasks. As the pandemic progressed, I saw Woebot awaken to what was happening in the world. “It must be a strange time to be a human,” it told me.
Woebot reached peak pandemic when it sent me a recipe for banana bread. Still, I noticed that it stayed quiet about issues of social justice or, more recently, the war in Ukraine. I wondered what kind of global crises the bot would acknowledge, and how it could do so in a way that let it still communicate with all the millions of people who consult it each week. Usually it just kept the conversation vague, task-oriented.
Over time, I noticed various exercises I did with Woebot rubbing off in my daily life. Woebot taught me how to set SMART goals — specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and time-limited. Out went “I need to finish my Ph.D.” In came “Let’s write 500 words every day for the next six months.” Out went “I have to find a way to get through this lockdown without killing my parents.” In came “I’m going to go for extremely long solo walks in the park.”
Woebot isn’t the kind of mystical guru you go on an arduous journey to consult. Its guidance was practical and grounded to the point of feeling obvious. But through repetition and practice, it did start to amount to something more than just some prosaic words. It felt clichéd sometimes, but maybe that was the point. Perhaps everyday healing doesn’t have to be quite so complicated.
